|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBI/2018/22 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 8 March 2019  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Implementation
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its forty-ninth session, held in Katowice from 2 to 8 December 2018
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)		1–2	4
		II.	Organizational matters 
(Agenda item 2)		3–16	4
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		3–5	4
		B.	Organization of the work of the session 		6–10	6
			C.	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international 
assessment and review process 		11	7
			D.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and 
analysis process		12–13	7
		E.	Other mandated events		14	7
		F.	Election of officers other than the Chair		15–16	7
		III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 3)		17–19	8
			A.	Status of submission and review of seventh national communications and 
third biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		17	8
			B.	Compilations and syntheses of second and third biennial reports from 
Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		18	8
			C.	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in 
Annex I to the Convention for the period 1990–2016		19	8
		IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 4)		20–28	8
			A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included
in Annex I to the Convention (held in abeyance)			8
			B.	Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from
Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention		20–24	8
			C.	Review of the terms of reference of the Consultative Group of Experts on
National Communications from Parties not included in
Annex I to the Convention		25–26	9
		D.	Provision of financial and technical support		27	10
			E.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports
of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention		28	10
		V.	Common time frames for nationally determined contributions referred to in
Article 4, paragraph 10, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 5)		29–30	10
		VI.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a 
public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 6)		31–32	10
		VII.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a
public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 7)		33–34	11
		VIII.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda item 8)		35–36	11
			A.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean 
development mechanism		35	11
			B.	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log
under the Kyoto Protocol 		36	11
		IX.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture
(Agenda item 9)		37–44	11
		X.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism
for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 10)		45	12
		XI.	Report of the Adaptation Committee: 2018 report; and matters referred to
in paragraphs 41, 42 and 45 of decision 1/CP.21
(Agenda item 11)		46–48	12
		XII.	Matters relating to the least developed countries; and matters referred to
in paragraphs 41 and 45 of decision 1/CP.21
(Agenda item 12)		49–65	13
		XIII.	National adaptation plans
(Agenda item 13)		66–70	14
		XIV.	Development and transfer of technologies
(Agenda item 14)		71–74	15
			A.	Scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment referred to
in paragraph 69 of decision 1/CP.21		71–72	15
			B	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and
the Climate Technology Centre and Network		73	15
		C.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer		74	15
		XV.	Matters relating to climate finance: identification of the information to be provided
by Parties in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 15)		75–76	16
		XVI.	Matters relating to capacity-building for developing countries
(Agenda item 16)		77–87	16
		A.	Capacity-building under the Convention		77	16
			B.	Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee
on Capacity-building		78–86	16
		C.	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol		87	17
		XVII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
(Agenda item 17)		88–97	17
		A.	Improved forum and work programme		88–94	17
			B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement
of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures		95–96	18
		C.	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol			19
		D.	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10		97	19
		XVIII.	Gender and climate change
(Agenda item 18)		98–106	19
		XIX.	Report on activities related to Action for Climate Empowerment
(Agenda item 19)		107	20
		XX.	Report on matters related to the Paris Agreement work programme under 
agenda items 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 14(a), 15 and 17(b)
(Agenda items 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 14(a), 15 and 17(b))		108–109	20
		XXI.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
(Agenda item 20)		110–115	21
		A.	Audit report and financial statements for 2017			21
		B.	Budget performance for the biennium 2018–2019			21
		C.	Budgetary matters			21
		D.	Continuous review of the functions and operations of the secretariat		110–115	21
		XXII.	Other matters
(Agenda item 21)		116	22
		XXIII.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 22)		117–123	22
		
Addendum – FCCC/SBI/2018/22/Add.1
Summary reports on multilateral assessments at the forty-ninth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation
	
	I.	Opening of the session
(Agenda item 1)
		1.	The forty-ninth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) was held at the International Conference Centre in Katowice, Poland, from 2 to 8 December 2018.
		2.	The Chair of the SBI, Mr. Emmanuel Dumisani Dlamini (Eswatini), opened the session on Sunday, 2 December, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Mr. Naser Moghaddasi (Islamic Republic of Iran) as Vice-Chair and Ms. Aysin Turpanci (Turkey) as Rapporteur of the SBI.
	II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
			3.	At its 1st meeting, on 2 December, the SBI considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBI/2018/12).
			4.	On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to orally amend the title of sub-item 14(a) of the provisional agenda to “Scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment referred to in paragraph 69 of decision 1/CP.21” to fully reflect the mandate stemming from paragraph 69 of decision 1/CP.21.
			5.	Subsequently, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBI adopted the agenda as follows, with sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance:
				1.	Opening of the session.
				2.	Organizational matters:
					(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
					(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
					(c)	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process;
					(d)	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process;
					(e)	Other mandated events;
					(f)	Election of officers other than the Chair.
				3.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention:
					(a)	Status of submission and review of seventh national communications and third biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(b)	Compilations and syntheses of second and third biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(c)	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention for the period 1990–2016.
				4.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention:
					(a)	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (held in abeyance);
					(b)	Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(c)	Review of the terms of reference of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(d)	Provision of financial and technical support;
					(e)	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention.
				5.	Common time frames for nationally determined contributions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 10, of the Paris Agreement.
				6.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
				7.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
				8.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol:
					(a)	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism;
					(b)	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol.
				9.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture.
				10.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.
				11.	Report of the Adaptation Committee: 2018 report; and matters referred to in paragraphs 41, 42 and 45 of decision 1/CP.21.
				12.	Matters relating to the least developed countries; and matters referred to in paragraphs 41 and 45 of decision 1/CP.21.
				13.	National adaptation plans.
				14.	Development and transfer of technologies:
					(a)	Scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment referred to in paragraph 69 of decision 1/CP.21;
					(b)	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network;
					(c)	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer.
				15.	Matters relating to climate finance: identification of the information to be provided by Parties in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement.
				16.	Matters relating to capacity-building for developing countries:
					(a)	Capacity-building under the Convention;
					(b)	Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building;
					(c)	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol.
				17.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
					(a)	Improved forum and work programme;
					(b)	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures;
					(c)	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol;
					(d)	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10.
				18.	Gender and climate change.
				19.	Report on activities related to Action for Climate Empowerment.
				20.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters:
					(a)	Audit report and financial statements for 2017;
					(b)	Budget performance for the biennium 2018–2019;
					(c)	Budgetary matters;
					(d)	Continuous review of the functions and operations of the secretariat.
				21.	Other matters.
				22.	Closure of and report on the session.
		B.	Organization of the work of the session
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			6.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. The Chair drew attention to the deadline for all groups to conclude their work by 1 p.m. on Friday, 7 December, to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary, which was to be convened on Saturday, 8 December. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to proceed on that basis and in line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
			7.	At the 2nd meeting of the SBI, on 2 December, which was held jointly with the 2nd meeting of the Conference of the Parties (COP) at its twenty-fourth session, the 2nd meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) at its fourteenth session, the 22nd meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) at its first session, the 2nd meeting of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) at its forty-ninth session and the 21st meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Paris Agreement (APA) at its first session, statements were made by representatives of 13 Parties on behalf of the following groups of Parties: the African Group; the Alliance of Small Island States; the Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; the Environmental Integrity Group; the European Union and its member States; the Group of 77 and China; the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; the least developed countries (LDCs); the Like-minded Developing Countries; and the Umbrella Group. Statements were also made on behalf of business and industry non-governmental organizations (NGOs), environmental NGOs, indigenous peoples organizations, local government and municipal authorities, research and independent NGOs, trade union NGOs, women and gender NGOs and youth NGOs.
			8.	Between 4 and 7 December, the SBI and SBSTA Chairs and the APA Co-Chairs convened joint meetings of heads of delegation to inform Parties of progress in the work of the SBI, the SBSTA and the APA pertaining to the implementation of the Paris Agreement work programme (PAWP) and to address unresolved issues.
			9.	At the first part of its 3rd meeting, on 8 December, the SBI considered all the non‑PAWP-related items on its agenda and adopted conclusions on these matters as presented in this report. The SBI then heard statements from NGOs (see para. 121 below). At the second part of its 3rd meeting, also on 8 December, the SBI considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP-related items on its agenda as presented in paragraph 109 below.
			10.	At the 4th meeting of the SBI, on 8 December, which was held jointly with the 4th meeting of the SBSTA and the 23nd meeting of the APA, closing statements were made by representatives of Parties and groups of Parties (see para. 122 below).
		C.	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			11.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided by its Chair on the organization of the multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process that was to take place on 3 and 7 December. A summary report on the multilateral assessment of the 11 Parties assessed at the session is contained in the addendum to this report.
		D.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process
(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
			12.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided by its Chair on the organization of the workshop for the facilitative sharing of views (FSV) under the international consultation and analysis (ICA) process that was to take place on 3 and 7 December.
			13.	The Chair drew attention to the ICA modalities and guidelines as well as to the FSV web pages. He informed the SBI that the output of the ICA process will include, for each of the 10 Parties participating in the FSV workshop, a record of the proceedings of the FSV session and a summary report as the outcome of the technical analysis of the Party’s biennial update report (BUR).
		E.	Other mandated events
(Agenda sub-item 2(e))
			14.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided on the other mandated events being held at the session.
		F.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(f))
			15.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled rule 27 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, whereby the SBI was expected to elect its Vice-Chair and Rapporteur. At the same meeting, the SBI noted that the consultations on the nominations were ongoing.
			16.	At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI elected Mr. Moghaddasi as Vice-Chair of the SBI. The Chair informed Parties that the nomination for Rapporteur of the SBI was still pending, and that, in accordance with rule 22, paragraph 2, of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the current Rapporteur, Ms. Turpanci, shall remain in office until such nomination has been received.
	III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 3)
		A.	Status of submission and review of seventh national communications and third biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(a))
			17.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.14. Representatives of four Parties made statements.
		B.	Compilations and syntheses of second and third biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(b))
			18.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.8 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that its Chair would undertake consultations with interested Parties on the matter. At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue its consideration of the matter at SBI 50 (June 2019). The representative of one Party made a statement.
		C.	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention for the period 1990–2016
(Agenda sub-item 3(c))
			19.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2018/17. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that its Chair would undertake consultations with interested Parties on the matter. At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue its consideration of the matter at SBI 50. Representatives of two Parties made statements.
	IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 4)
		A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance)
		B.	Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 4(b))
			1.	Proceedings
			20.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2018/14, FCCC/SBI/2018/20 and FCCC/SBI/2018/21. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Mr. Thiago de Araujo Mendes (Brazil), Chair of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (CGE), to deliver a brief oral report on the work of the CGE. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Stephen King’uyu (Kenya) and Ms. Helen Plume (New Zealand). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
			21.	The SBI noted the report on the progress of work of the CGE covering the period 2014–2018 and the two reports capturing the outcomes of key activities of the CGE undertaken in 2018.
			22.	The SBI commended the efforts made by the CGE in the period 2014–2018 and acknowledged the substantial contribution of technical advice and support from the CGE to improving the process for the preparation of national communications (NCs) and BURs by Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties), including the following:
				(a)	Developing a comprehensive set of training materials and resources covering the substantive areas of NCs, BURs and technical analysis;
				(b)	Training 1,041 national experts through 23 regional hands-on training workshops and another 1,142 experts through 25 targeted webinars;
				(c)	Preparing targeted analytical outputs, such as compilations and syntheses of problems, constraints, lessons learned and best practices in the preparation of NCs and BURs; and recommendations on elements to be considered in a future revision of the guidelines for the preparation of NCs from non-Annex I Parties.
			23.	The SBI expressed its gratitude to the countries that hosted CGE hands-on training workshops and CGE meetings in the period 2014–2018.
			24.	The SBI thanked the Parties that made financial contributions to the work of the CGE. It also thanked the international organizations that made in-kind and financial contributions.
		C.	Review of the terms of reference of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 4(c))
			25.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2018/14, FCCC/SBI/2018/20 and FCCC/SBI/2018/21. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. King’uyu and Ms. Plume. At the first part of the 3rd meeting, the Chair informed Parties that the SBI had been unable to conclude its consideration of the matter. He proposed, and the SBI agreed, to inform the President of the COP accordingly.
			26.	The Chair noted Parties’ strong support for resolving this matter under the guidance of the Presidency and taking into account developments related to the modalities, procedures and guidelines under Article 13 of the Paris Agreement.
		D.	Provision of financial and technical support
(Agenda sub-item 4(d))
			27.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.9. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited a representative of the Global Environment Facility to make a statement. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed that its Chair would undertake consultations with interested Parties on the matter. At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue its consideration of the matter at SBI 50.
		E.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 4(e))
			28.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the summary reports made available on the UNFCCC website by 12 October 2018.
	V.	Common time frames for nationally determined contributions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 10, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 5)
		29.	The SBI considered this PAWP-related agenda item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to convene informal consultations on this item co-facilitated by Ms. Marianne Karlsen (Norway) and Mr. George Wamukoya (Kenya).
		30.	At the second part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP-related items on its agenda, including this one, as presented in paragraph 109 below.
	VI.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 6)
		31.	The SBI considered this PAWP-related agenda item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to convene informal consultations on this item co-facilitated by Ms. Emily Massawa (Gambia) and Mr. Peter Wittoeck (Belgium).
		32.	At the second part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP-related items on its agenda, including this one, as presented in paragraph 109 below.
	VII.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 7)
		33.	The SBI considered this PAWP-related agenda item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to convene informal consultations on this item co-facilitated by Ms. Massawa and Mr. Wittoeck.
		34.	At the second part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP-related items on its agenda, including this one, as presented in paragraph 109 below.
	VIII.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda item 8)
		A.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism
(Agenda sub-item 8(a))
			35.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and agreed to continue its consideration of the matter at SBI 50.
		B.	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 8(b))
			36.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.10.
	IX.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture
(Agenda item 9)
		1.	Proceedings
		37.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 49 agenda item 8 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Heikki Granholm (Finland) and Ms. Milagros Sandoval (Peru). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
		38.	The SBI and the SBSTA continued their joint work on addressing issues related to agriculture.
		39.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the first in-session workshop under the Koronivia road map on topic 2(a) (Modalities for implementation of the outcomes of the five in-session workshops on issues related to agriculture and other future topics that may arise from this work), held in conjunction with the sessions, and look forward to considering the report on the workshop at SBI 50 and SBSTA 50 (June 2019) as mandated at SBI 48 and SBSTA 48. They also welcomed the submissions from Parties and observers that served as input to the workshop.
		40.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the participation in the workshop of representatives of the constituted bodies under the Convention and observers, including a representative of the Green Climate Fund. They noted with appreciation the work undertaken by these bodies and observers on issues related to agriculture. The SBI and the SBSTA recalled their invitation to representatives of the constituted bodies under the Convention to contribute to the work referred to in paragraph 39 above and invited them to participate in the workshops under the Koronivia road map.
		41.	The SBI and the SBSTA also invited the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, the Adaptation Fund, the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund to contribute to the work referred to in paragraph 39 above and attend the workshops under the Koronivia road map.
		42.	The SBI and the SBSTA reiterated their invitation to Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal, by 6 May 2019, their views on topics 2(b) (Methods and approaches for assessing adaptation, adaptation co-benefits and resilience) and 2(c) (Improved soil carbon, soil health and soil fertility under grassland and cropland as well as integrated systems, including water management), on which workshops will be organized in conjunction with SBI 50 and SBSTA 50.
		43.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the proposal made by New Zealand to host a workshop related to the Koronivia road map. They agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 50 and SBSTA 50.
		44.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of this agenda item at SBI 50 and SBSTA 50.
	X.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 10)
		45.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2018/1. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 49 agenda item 4 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Lisa Gittos (Australia) and Mr. Lucas di Pietro (Argentina). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption at COP 24.
	XI.	Report of the Adaptation Committee: 2018 report; and matters referred to in paragraphs 41, 42 and 45 of decision 1/CP.21
(Agenda item 11)
		46.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2018/3. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the 2018 report of the Adaptation Committee would be considered jointly under this item and the equally titled SBSTA 49 agenda item 3 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Gabriela Fischerova (Slovakia) and Ms. Pepetua Latasi (Tuvalu). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption at COP 24.
		47.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI also agreed that the PAWP-related matters referred to in paragraphs 41, 42 and 45 of decision 1/CP.21 would be considered jointly under this item and the equally titled SBSTA 49 agenda item 3 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Fischerova and Ms. Latasi. The SBI also agreed that these consultations would be conducted jointly with the consultations under agenda item 12 on the PAWP-related matters referred to in paragraphs 41 and 45 of decision 1/CP.21 co-facilitated by Ms. Latasi and Mr. Malcolm Ridout (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) (see para. 51 below).
		48.	At the second part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP-related items on its agenda, including this one, as presented in paragraph 109 below.
	XII.	Matters relating to the least developed countries; and matters referred to in paragraphs 41 and 45 of decision 1/CP.21
(Agenda item 12)
		1.	Proceedings
		49.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2018/18. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Mr. Aderito Santana (Sao Tome and Principe), Chair of the Least Developed Country Expert Group (LEG), to deliver a brief oral report on the work of the LEG. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider matters relating to the LDCs in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Latasi and Mr. Ridout.
		50.	At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions presented in paragraphs 53–65 below.
		51.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI also agreed that informal consultations under this agenda item on the PAWP-related matters referred to in paragraphs 41 and 45 of decision 1/CP.21 would be conducted jointly with the consultations under agenda item 11 on the PAWP-related matters referred to in paragraphs 41, 42 and 45 of decision 1/CP.21 (see para. 47 above).
		52.	At the second part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP-related items on its agenda, including this one, as presented in paragraph 109 below.
			2.	Conclusions on matters relating to the least developed countries
		53.	The SBI welcomed the report on the 34th meeting of the LEG and expressed its appreciation to the Government of Sierra Leone for hosting the meeting in Freetown from 21 to 24 August 2018.
		54.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to the LEG and the secretariat for their work in supporting the LDCs and for continuing to coordinate support activities with relevant organizations.
		55.	The SBI welcomed the work of the LEG on learning from climate shocks and on linkages between national adaptation plans (NAPs) and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
		56.	The SBI noted that 6 of the 22 proposals from developing countries for accessing funding from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme, which supports the formulation of NAPs, that had been approved by the GCF secretariat as at 4 December 2018 were from the LDCs.
		57.	The SBI also noted that the 6 proposals referred to in paragraph 45 above accounted for a total of USD 15 million, of the total of USD 59.2 million for all 22 proposals.
		58.	The SBI further noted the progress made in the process to formulate and implement NAPs and the work of the LEG on considering the challenges faced by the LDCs in the process to formulate and implement NAPs, and noted the need for further progress in accessing funding from the GCF.
		59.	The SBI recognized the importance of the NAP Expo as a global outreach event on the process to formulate and implement NAPs and welcomed the opportunity for engagement between the GCF and participants at the NAP Expo.
		60.	The SBI took note of the preparations under way for the NAP Expo planned to take place in April 2019 in Incheon, Republic of Korea, and invited Parties and relevant organizations to assist the LEG with organizing, and to participate in, the event.
		61.	The SBI noted that, as at 30 September 2018, the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) funding approved during Global Environment Facility fiscal year 2018 amounted to USD 78.4 million, and that cumulative funding approvals since the establishment of the LDCF amounted to USD 1.25 billion.
		62.	The SBI noted with appreciation the financial pledges of EUR 1 million made by the Government of Ireland and 50 million Swedish krona made by the Government of Sweden to the LDCF and urged additional contributions to the Fund.
		63.	The SBI looks forward to receiving further information from the LEG on the objectives of and process for countries to engage in Open NAPs, and on how to make best use of them.
		64.	The SBI requested the LEG to continue to prioritize the activities in its work programme on the basis of the availability of financial resources to carry them out.
		65.	The SBI invited Parties and relevant organizations to continue to provide financial support for the implementation of the LEG work programme.
	XIII.	National adaptation plans
(Agenda item 13)
		1.	Proceedings
		66.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2018/18, FCCC/SB/2018/3 and FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.13. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Latasi and Mr. Ridout. At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
		67.	The SBI welcomed the document on progress in the process to formulate and implement NAPs and took note of the other relevant documents prepared for the session.
		68.	The SBI welcomed the successful conduct of the regional NAP Expos that took place on 14 June 2018 in Lilongwe, Malawi, on 22 and 23 October 2018 in Panama City, Panama, and on 6 November 2018 in Libreville, Gabon, and the active participation therein of representatives of developing countries and other relevant stakeholders.
		69.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to the Governments of Gabon, Malawi and Panama for hosting the regional NAP Expos referred to in paragraph 68 above.
		70.	The SBI recommended a draft decision on NAPs for consideration and adoption at COP 24.
	XIV.	Development and transfer of technologies
(Agenda item 14)
		A.	Scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment referred to in paragraph 69 of decision 1/CP.21
(Agenda sub-item 14(a))
			71.	The SBI considered this PAWP-related agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to convene informal consultations on this sub-item co-facilitated by Mr. Ian Lloyd (United States of America) and Ms. Claudia Octaviano (Mexico).
			72.	At the second part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP-related items on its agenda, including this one, as presented in paragraph 109 below.
		B.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network
(Agenda sub-item 14(b))
			73.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2018/2. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Ms. Octaviano, Chair of the TEC to deliver a brief oral report on the work and achievements of the TEC in 2019. The Chair then invited Ms. Maya Tskhvaradze (Georgia), Chair of the Advisory Board of the CTCN to present the work of the CTCN. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed that the agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 49 agenda sub-item 5(b) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Stella Gama (Malawi) and Ms. Ulrika Raab (Sweden). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on enhancing climate technology development and transfer through the Technology Mechanism for consideration and adoption at COP 24.
		C.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer
(Agenda sub-item 14(c))
			74.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and agreed to continue its consideration of the matter at SBI 50.
	XV.	Matters relating to climate finance: identification of the information to be provided by Parties in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 15)
		75.	The SBI considered this PAWP-related agenda item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to convene informal consultations on this item co-facilitated by Ms. Outi Honkatukia (Finland) and Mr. Seyni Nafo (Mali).
		76.	At the second part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP-related items on its agenda, including this one, as presented in paragraph 109 below.
	XVI.	Matters relating to capacity-building for developing countries
(Agenda item 16)
		A.	Capacity-building under the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 16(a))
			77.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2018/13.
		B.	Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building
(Agenda sub-item 16(b))
			1.	Proceedings
			78.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2018/15. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Ms. Marzena Chodor (Poland), Chair of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building (PCCB), to deliver a brief oral report on the work of the PCCB. At the same meeting, the Chair recalled that the COP, at its 1st meeting, had referred to the SBI the consideration of the review of the progress, need for extension, effectiveness and enhancement of the PCCB with a view for the SBI to recommend a draft decision on enhancing institutional arrangements for capacity-building for consideration and adoption at COP 25 in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 81. The SBI agreed to consider that matter together with this sub-item.
			79.	At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the matters in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Jeniffer Hanna Collado (Dominican Republic) and Mr. Makoto Kato (Japan). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
			80.	Recalling the request by the COP at the opening of the session, the SBI initiated its work on the review of the progress, need for extension, effectiveness and enhancement of the PCCB with a view to recommending a draft decision on enhancing institutional arrangements for capacity-building for consideration and adoption at COP 25 (December 2019), taking into account Article 11, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement, in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 81.
			81.	The SBI invited Parties and observers to submit their views on the matters referred to in paragraph 80 above via the submission portal, by 31 March 2019, for consideration at SBI 50.
			82.	The SBI agreed that all available annual technical progress reports of the PCCB will serve as inputs to the review of the progress, need for extension, effectiveness and enhancement of the PCCB.
			83.	The SBI requested the secretariat to prepare a compilation and synthesis of the submissions referred to in paragraph 81 above for consideration at SBI 50.
			84.	The SBI agreed to continue its work on the matters referred to in paragraph 80 above at SBI 50 and SBI 51 (December 2019) drawing on the materials referred to in paragraphs 81–83 above, as appropriate.
			85.	The SBI took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activity to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 83 above and requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
			86.	Having considered the 2018 technical progress report of the PCCB, the SBI recommended a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption at COP 24.
		C.	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 16(c))
			87.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2018/13.
	XVII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
(Agenda item 17)
		A.	Improved forum and work programme
(Agenda sub-item 17(a))
			1.	Proceedings
			88.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.3 and FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.4 as well as the submissions related to the sub-item. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed that the agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 49 agenda sub-item 9(a). The SBI also agreed that its Chair and the Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Paul Watkinson (France), would convene the 6th meeting of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures as a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Keith Anderson (Switzerland) and Mr. Andrei Marcu (Belize). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
			89.	The SBSTA and the SBI convened the 6th meeting of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
			90.	The SBSTA and the SBI welcomed the report prepared by the secretariat on the workshop on the use of economic modelling tools related to the areas of the work programme of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures, convened from 30 April to 1 May 2018 in Bonn.
			91.	The SBSTA and the SBI noted the variety of views expressed by Parties and one observer organization in their submissions on the work of the improved forum, including the modalities for its operation, pursuant to the agreed scope of the review of the work programme of the improved forum.
			92.	The SBSTA and the SBI considered the synthesis report on the work of the improved forum prepared by the secretariat on the basis of the submissions referred to in paragraph 91 above and took note of the discussions that took place at the one-day in-session review of the work of the improved forum.
			93.	The SBSTA and the SBI took note of the range of views expressed during the review of the work of the improved forum and recommended that they could be considered in developing the functions, work programme and modalities of the forum that will serve the Paris Agreement:
				(a)	Continuing to use the modalities of inviting submissions from Parties and non-Party stakeholders, preparing synthesis reports and technical papers, and organizing workshops, including regional ones;
				(b)	Collaborating with external experts, international organizations and the private sector and engaging with vulnerable groups and indigenous peoples;
				(c)	Undertaking technical work focusing on different sectors, including transportation, energy, agriculture and tourism;
				(d)	Assessing and analysing the impact of the implementation of response measures;
				(e)	Impacts of the implementation of response measures on economic development in relation to international trade, employment, just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs, and economic diversification and transformation;
				(f)	Establishing a permanent governance structure through a technical expert group;
				(g)	A focused and effective work programme comprising the two areas identified in decision 11/CP.21, paragraph 5, namely economic diversification and transformation, and just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs;
				(h)	Ensuring that the forum welcomes and includes all Parties, encouraging participation by all, and is thus convened in conjunction with the sessions of the subsidiary bodies.
			94.	The SBSTA and the SBI concluded the review of the work of the improved forum. They recommended draft conclusions on the matter for consideration and adoption at COP 24.
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures
(Agenda sub-item 17(b))
			95.	The SBI considered this PAWP-related agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 49 agenda sub-item 9(b) and that it would establish a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Anderson and Mr. Marcu.
			96.	At the second part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP-related items on its agenda, including this one, as presented in paragraph 109 below.
		C.	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 17(c))
		D.	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10
(Agenda sub-item 17(d))
			97.	The SBI considered these agenda sub-items at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to the Chair’s proposal that substantive discussions on the sub-items be held in the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures jointly with discussions on sub-item 17(a). At the first part of the 3rd meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that no specific conclusions had been reached on the matters. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to continue its consideration of the matters at SBI 50.
	XVIII.	Gender and climate change
(Agenda item 18)
		1.	Proceedings
		98.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.15. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled that the COP, at its 1st meeting, had referred to the SBI the consideration of the annual report on gender composition. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider both matters in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Colin O’Hehir (Ireland) and Ms. Penda Kante Thiam (Senegal). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
		99.	The SBI welcomed the report on the in-session workshop on the differentiated impacts of climate change; gender-responsive climate policy and action; and policies, plans and progress in enhancing gender balance in national delegations, held in Bonn on 2 and 9 May 2018.
		100.	The SBI took note of the informal report on the dialogue with the Chairs of the constituted bodies that was held on 5 May 2018. Representatives of constituted bodies used the dialogue to consider the technical paper on entry points for integrating gender considerations into UNFCCC workstreams and identified concrete actions that each body could take, including greater cooperation and collaboration among constituted bodies on the integration of gender considerations.
		101.	The SBI welcomed the information provided by Parties and the secretariat during the consideration by the SBI of the activities undertaken by Parties, constituted bodies, observer organizations and the secretariat in 2018 in support of the Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan and encouraged the continuation and enhancement of such activities in 2019.
		102.	The SBI reminded Parties of the invitation by the COP to appoint, and provide support for, a national gender focal point for climate negotiations, implementation and monitoring and noted that, to date, only 42 Parties had appointed a focal point.
		103.	The SBI welcomed the capacity-building on gender provided by the secretariat, in collaboration with United Nations entities, other stakeholders and relevant organizations, to the PCCB and the Adaptation Committee in October 2018. It encouraged the constituted bodies to participate in the further capacity-building activities that are planned for relevant constituted bodies in 2019 under activity C.2 of the gender action plan.
		104.	The SBI encouraged Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal, by 31 August 2019, information on the implementation of the gender action plan, identifying areas of progress, areas for improvement and further work to be undertaken in subsequent action plans so as to inform the synthesis report on this topic to be prepared by the secretariat for consideration at SBI 51.
		105.	The SBI encouraged the secretariat to collect further information from Parties and observers as needed on the topic referred to in paragraph 104 above in order to make the synthesis report more comprehensive.
		106.	As requested at COP 24, the SBI considered the annual gender composition report prepared by the secretariat and recommended draft conclusions thereon as well as on the review of the Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan for consideration and adoption at COP 24.
	XIX.	Report on activities related to Action for Climate Empowerment
(Agenda item 19)
		107.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2018/19. The SBI welcomed the organization of the regional workshop on Action for Climate Empowerment for Europe and the Mediterranean region, held in La Spezia, Italy, from 2 to 4 October 2018. It expressed its appreciation to the Government of Italy for its support and cooperation, and invited Parties in a position to do so to support the organization of other regional workshops in accordance with decision 17/CP.22.
	XX.	Report on matters related to the Paris Agreement work programme under agenda items 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 14(a), 15 and 17(b)
(Agenda items 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 14(a), 15 and 17(b))
		1.	Proceedings
		108.	At the second part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below on the PAWP-related items on its agenda – 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 14(a), 15 and 17(b) – which were, mutatis mutandis, identical to the conclusions adopted by the SBSTA and the APA on the PAWP.
			2.	Conclusions
		109.	Pursuant to the requests of the COP, the SBI agreed to forward the proposals by its Chair for the outcomes of its work on the PAWP. The proposals are being forwarded for consideration at COP 24 without prejudice to the content and form of the final outcome of the PAWP and recognizing that further work by the COP is necessary to finalize the PAWP outcome. , ,
	XXI.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
(Agenda item 20)
		A.	Audit report and financial statements for 2017
(Agenda sub-item 20(a))
		B.	Budget performance for the biennium 2018–2019
(Agenda sub-item 20(b))
		C.	Budgetary matters
(Agenda sub-item 20(c))
		D.	Continuous review of the functions and operations of the secretariat
(Agenda sub-item 20(d))
			1.	Proceedings
			110.	The SBI considered these agenda sub-items at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2018/16 and Add.1 and 2, FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.11 and Add.1, FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.12, FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.16, FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.17 and FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.18. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited the Deputy Executive Secretary to introduce the sub-items, and a representative of the United Nations Board of Auditors to present the key points relating to the audit report. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to establish a contact group, to be chaired by Mr. Amena Yauvoli (Fiji). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
			111.	The SBI agreed that it would continue to consider possible ways to increase the efficiency and transparency of the budget process, including options for increasing flexibility in the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities, approaches to addressing outstanding contributions to the core budget, the level of the working capital reserve and timely funding for the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process.
			112.	The SBI took note of the information contained in the documents on administrative, financial and institutional matters.
			113.	The SBI welcomed the approach taken by the secretariat to present information in a transparent, balanced and integrated manner for the 2020–2021 programme budget, including the intention to approach Parties in 2019, prior to SBI 50, for feedback on the overall approach, format and budget levels.
			114.	The SBI considered the enhancements to the annual report on the secretariat’s activities proposed in the update on annual report preparation, and requested the secretariat to prepare the annual report for 2018 in line with the proposed enhancements.
			115.	The SBI recommended two draft decisions on administrative, financial and institutional matters: one for consideration and adoption at COP 24 and one for consideration and adoption at CMP 14.
	XXII.	Other matters
(Agenda item 21)
		116.	No other matters were raised.
	XXIII.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 22)
		1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
		117.	At the first part of the 3rd meeting of the SBI, the Deputy Executive Secretary provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during the session, in accordance with the provisions of rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
		118.	One activity resulting from the negotiations at the session calls for more support from the secretariat and requires additional resources over and above the core budget for the biennium 2018–2019: under agenda item 10, “Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts”, funding in the amount of EUR 350,000 in 2019 will be required to facilitate the further work of the Task Force on Displacement and the implementation of the further work of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism under its workstream D, on human mobility.
		119.	The Deputy Executive Secretary noted that the amount was preliminary and based on information available at that time, and that costs for 2020 and beyond will be reviewed in the context of the budget preparation for 2020–2021. He expressed the hope that the secretariat can count on the continuing generosity of Parties in providing funding for activities in a timely and predictable manner. He also noted that without such contributions the secretariat will not be in a position to provide the requested support.
			2.	Closure of and report on the session
		120.	At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur to complete the report thereon with the assistance of the secretariat and to make it available to all Parties.
		121.	At the same meeting, the Chair invited statements from NGOs. Statements were made on behalf of business and industry NGOs, environmental NGOs, indigenous peoples organizations, research and independent NGOs, trade union NGOs, women and gender NGOs and youth NGOs.
		122.	At the 4th meeting of the SBI, which was held jointly with the 4th meeting of the SBSTA and the 23rd meeting of the APA, the SBI Chair, together with the SBSTA Chair and the APA Co-Chairs, thanked the Government of Poland and the city of Katowice for their hospitality and for providing the facilities and an environment conducive to advancing the negotiations. At the same meeting, statements were made by representatives of 14 Parties, including 12 on behalf of the following groups of Parties: the African Group; the Alliance of Small Island States; the Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; the Environmental Integrity Group; the European Union and its member States; the Group of 77 and China; the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; the LDCs; the Like-minded Developing Countries; the Coalition for Rainforest Nations; and the Umbrella Group.
		123.	At the end of the joint plenary, the Chair closed the session.
		
