|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBI/2024/13 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 30 July 2024  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Implementation
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its sixtieth session, held in Bonn from 3 to 13 June 2024
	Contents
		Page
		Abbreviations and acronyms		4
		I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)		5
		II.	Organizational matters 
(Agenda item 2)		5
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		5
		B.	Election of officers other than the Chair		7
			C.	Organization of the work of the session		7
		D.	Multilateral assessment under the international assessment and review process		7
		E.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process		8
		F.	Mandated events		8
			III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda item 3)		8
				A.	Status of submission and review of national communications and biennial reports
 from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		8
				B.	Compilations and syntheses of biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to 
the Convention		9
				C.	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to 
the Convention		9
			IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda item 4)		9
				A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in 
Annex I to the Convention		9
		B.	Provision of financial and technical support		9
			C.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties
not included in Annex I to the Convention		9
			V.	Matters relating to the global stocktake 
(Agenda item 5)		10
		A.	Procedural and logistical elements of the overall global stocktake process		10
			B.	Modalities of the United Emirates dialogue on implementing the global stocktake 
outcomes, referred to in paragraph 97 of decision 1/CMA.5		10
			VI.	Sharm el-Sheikh mitigation ambition and implementation work programme 
(Agenda item 6)		11
			VII.	United Arab Emirates just transition work programme 
(Agenda item 7)		11
			VIII.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures
serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 8)		12
			IX.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and 
food security
(Agenda item 9)		13
			X.	Matters relating to adaptation 
(Agenda item 10)		14
		A.	Matters relating to the global goal on adaptation		14
			B.	Report of the Adaptation Committee and review of the progress, effectiveness and 
performance of the Adaptation Committee		18
		C.	National adaptation plans		19
			XI.	Matters relating to the least developed countries 
(Agenda item 11)		19
			XII.	Terms of reference for the 2024 review of the Warsaw International Mechanism for 
Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts 
(Agenda item 12)		22
			XIII.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology 
Mechanism: linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism 
(Agenda item 13)		23
			XIV.	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund 
(Agenda item 14)		23
			XV.	Matters relating to capacity-building 
(Agenda item 15)		24
			XVI.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings 
(Agenda item 16)		25
			XVII.	Gender and climate change 
(Agenda item 17)		29
			XVIII.	Matters relating to Action for Climate Empowerment 
(Agenda item 18)		30
			XIX.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters 
(Agenda item 19)		30
			XX.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 20)		30
		XXI.	Closure of and report on the session 
		(Agenda item 21)		30
		Annexes
			I.	Terms of reference for the 2024 review of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and 
Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts 		33
			II.	Road map for the Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on 
agriculture and food security		36
	Addendum – FCCC/SBI/2024/13/Add.1
		Draft decisions forwarded for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
	Addendum – FCCC/SBI/2024/13/Add.2
	Summary reports on multilateral assessments at the sixtieth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation

Abbreviations and acronyms
	| AILAC | Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean |
	| AOSIS | Alliance of Small Island States |
	| CMA | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement |
	| CMP | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol |
	| COP | Conference of the Parties |
	| EIG | Environmental Integrity Group |
	| EU | European Union |
	| GCF | Green Climate Fund |
	| GEF | Global Environment Facility |
	| LDC | least developed country |
	| LDCF | Least Developed Countries Fund |
	| LEG | Least Developed Countries Expert Group |
	| LMDCs | Like-minded Developing Countries |
	| LT-LEDS | long-term low-emission development strategy(ies) |
	| NAP | national adaptation plan |
	| NDC | nationally determined contribution |
	| NGO | non-governmental organization |
	| SB | sessions of the subsidiary bodies |
	| SBI | Subsidiary Body for Implementation |
	| SBSTA | Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice |
	| WIM | Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts |
	
	
I.	Opening of the session
(Agenda item 1)
	1.	SBI 60 was held at the World Conference Center Bonn in Bonn, Germany, from 3 to 13 June 2024.
	2.	The SBI Chair, Nabeel Munir (Pakistan), opened the session and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Gonzalo Guaiquil (Chile) as Vice-Chair and Ayşin Turpanci (Türkiye) as Rapporteur.
	3.	The opening included welcoming remarks by the UNFCCC Executive Secretary, Simon Stiell, and tribute was paid to the late Daniel Machado da Fonseca (Brazil) for his significant contribution to the UNFCCC process.
II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
	A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
		4.	At its 1st meeting, held together with the 1st meeting of SBSTA 60, on 3 June, the SBI considered the note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations. The Chair recalled that, during the pre‑sessional consultations, Parties had expressed eagerness to work during the session and broad support for the proposed approach to adopting the agenda.
		5.	At the same meeting, the Chair proposed that the agenda be adopted with the exception of items 20–21 of the provisional agenda, with the understanding that he would conduct consultations on the way forward for those matters.
		6.	As proposed by the Chair, the SBI adopted the agenda as follows:
			1.	Opening of the session.
			2.	Organizational matters:
				(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
				(b)	Election of officers other than the Chair;
				(c)	Organization of the work of the session;
				(d)	Multilateral assessment under the international assessment and review process;
				(e)	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process;
				(f)	Mandated events.
			3.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention:
				(a)	Status of submission and review of national communications and biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(b)	Compilations and syntheses of biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(c)	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention.
			4.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention:
				(a)	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(b)	Provision of financial and technical support;
				(c)	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention.
			5.	Matters relating to the global stocktake:
				(a)	Procedural and logistical elements of the overall global stocktake process;*
				(b)	Modalities of the United Arab Emirates dialogue on implementing the global stocktake outcomes, referred to in paragraph 97 of decision 1/CMA.5.
			6.	Sharm el-Sheikh mitigation ambition and implementation work programme.*
			7.	United Arab Emirates just transition work programme.*
			8.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement.*
			9.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security.*
			10.	Matters relating to adaptation:
				(a)	Matters relating to the global goal on adaptation;*
				(b)	Report of the Adaptation Committee and review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee;*
				(c)	National adaptation plans.
			11.	Matters relating to the least developed countries.
			12.	Terms of reference for the 2024 review of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.*
			13.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism.
			14.	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund.
			15.	Matters relating to capacity-building.
			16.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings.
			17.	Gender and climate change.
			18.	Matters relating to Action for Climate Empowerment.
			19.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters.
			20.	Other matters.
			21.	Closure of and report on the session.
		7.	Representatives of three Parties made statements, including two on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group and LMDCs.
	B.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
		8.	At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled that the SBI was expected to elect its Vice-Chair and Rapporteur for 2024. At its 3rd meeting, on 13 June, the SBI re-elected Gonzalo Guaiquil as its Vice-Chair, and the Chair informed the SBI that the secretariat had not received any nominations for Rapporteur. In accordance with rule 22, paragraph 2, of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the serving Rapporteur, Ayşin Turpanci, will remain in office until her successor has been elected at SBI 61 (November 2024).
	C.	Organization of the work of the session
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
		9.	At the 1st meeting, the Chair encouraged Parties to engage constructively in the negotiations and respect meeting times, and recalled the deadline for all groups to conclude work by 6 p.m. on 12 June in order to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions in all official languages of the United Nations for the closing plenary on 13 June. He encouraged Parties to keep all informal consultations open to observers in accordance with established practice.
		10.	On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to proceed on that basis and in line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
		11.	At the 2nd meeting of the SBI, held together with the 2nd meeting of SBSTA 60, on 3 June, statements were made by representatives of 30 Parties, including 14 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; AILAC; AOSIS; Arab Group; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – People’s Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; Coalition for Rainforest Nations; EIG; EU and its member States; Group of 77 and China; Group SUR (formerly Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay); LDCs; LMDCs; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of seven United Nations and other intergovernmental organizations: Global Climate Observing System, Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, International Civil Aviation Organization, International Maritime Organization, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, World Climate Research Programme and World Meteorological Organization; and by representatives of eight UNFCCC NGO constituencies: business and industry, children and youth, environmental, research and independent, and trade union NGOs, Indigenous Peoples organizations, local government and municipal authorities, and women and gender constituency.
		12.	All documents prepared for this session are available on the UNFCCC website.
	D.	Multilateral assessment under the international assessment and review process 
(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
		13.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI took note of the information provided by its Chair on the second multilateral assessment working group session in the fifth and final cycle of the international assessment and review process, which took place in conjunction with this session, featuring 15 Parties included in Annex I to the Convention.,
	E.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process 
(Agenda sub-item 2(e))
		14.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI took note of the information provided by its Chair on the sixteenth workshop for the facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process, which took place in conjunction with this session, featuring eight Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. A representative of one Party made a statement.
	F.	Mandated events 
(Agenda sub-item 2(f))
		15.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI took note of the information provided by its Chair on the mandated events being held in conjunction with this session, including the 3rd and final Glasgow dialogue.
III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 3)
	16.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider each sub-item under this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Toby Hedger (United States of America) and Tian Wang (China).
	A.	Status of submission and review of national communications and biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda sub-item 3(a))
		17.	The SBI considered the note by the secretariat on the status of submission and review of national communications and biennial reports. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 61.
	B.	Compilations and syntheses of biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda sub-item 3(b))
		18.	The SBI considered the compilation and synthesis by the secretariat of the fifth biennial reports of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 61.
	C.	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda sub-item 3(c))
		19.	The SBI considered the report by the secretariat on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 61.
IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 4)
	A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda sub-item 4(a))
		20.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mausami Desai (United States of America) and Marcelo Rocha (Brazil).
		21.	At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered the information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention and agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 61.
	B.	Provision of financial and technical support 
(Agenda sub-item 4(b))
		22.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Steven Brine (Australia) and Sandra Motshwanedi (South Africa).
		23.	The SBI engaged in constructive discussions on this matter at this session. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of the matter at SBI 61 taking into account the draft text prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda sub-item.
	C.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda sub-item 4(c))
		24.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mausami Desai and Marcelo Rocha.
		25.	At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and agreed to take note of the summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention published as at 3 April 2024.
V.	Matters relating to the global stocktake 
(Agenda item 5)
	A.	Procedural and logistical elements of the overall global stocktake process*
(Agenda sub-item 5(a))
		1.	Proceedings
			26.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 60 agenda item 3 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Thureya Al Ali (United Arab Emirates) and Patrick Spicer (Canada). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			27.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the conclusion of the first global stocktake and the adoption of decision 1/CMA.5 on the outcome thereof.
			28.	The SBI and the SBSTA commenced and advanced consideration of refining the procedural and logistical elements of the overall global stocktake process on the basis of experience gained from the first global stocktake, in accordance with paragraph 192 of decision 1/CMA.5.
			29.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the informal note prepared by the co‑facilitators for the relevant agenda items at these sessions, noted that the informal note does not represent consensus among Parties and agreed to continue consideration of this matter, taking into account the informal note, at SB 61 (November 2024) with a view to CMA 6 (November 2024) concluding consideration of the matter.
	B.	Modalities of the United Emirates dialogue on implementing the global stocktake outcomes, referred to in paragraph 97 of decision 1/CMA.5 
(Agenda sub-item 5(b))
		1.	Proceedings
			30.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ricardo Marshall (Barbados) and Patrick Spicer. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			31.	The SBI initiated deliberations on the modalities of the United Arab Emirates dialogue on implementing the global stocktake outcomes, referred to in paragraph 97 of decision 1/CMA.5.
			32.	The SBI took note of the informal note prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda sub-item at this session, noted that the informal note does not represent consensus among Parties and agreed to continue consideration of this matter, taking into account the informal note, at SBI 61 with a view to CMA 6 concluding consideration of the matter.
			33.	The SBI invited Parties to submit via the submission portal by 15 September 2024 views on the modalities of the United Arab Emirates dialogue.
			34.	The SBI requested the secretariat to prepare a synthesis of the submissions referred to in paragraph ‎33 above for consideration at SBI 61.
VI.	Sharm el-Sheikh mitigation ambition and implementation work programme*
(Agenda item 6)
	35.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 60 agenda item 8 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Carlos Fuller (Belize) and Kay Harrison (New Zealand).
	36.	At the 3rd meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that Parties could not conclude consideration of this matter at this session. In accordance with rules 10(c) and 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBI 61. Representatives of 14 Parties made statements, including 8 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group, AILAC, AOSIS, EIG, EU and its member States, LDCs, LMDCs and Umbrella Group.
VII.	United Arab Emirates just transition work programme*
(Agenda item 7)
	1.	Proceedings
		37.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 60 agenda item 9 in a joint contact group co-chaired by Marianne Karlsen (Norway) and Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		38.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered matters relating to the implementation of the United Arab Emirates just transition work programme.
		39.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the first hybrid dialogue under the work programme, held from 2 to 3 June 2024 on the topic “Just transition pathways to achieving the goals of the Paris Agreement through NDCs, NAPs and LT-LEDS”, as decided upon and communicated by the Chairs of the SBI and the SBSTA on the basis of views submitted by Parties, observers and other non-Party stakeholders.
		40.	The SBI and the SBSTA recognized the significant contribution of the late Daniel Machado da Fonseca, who most recently held the position of Head of the Climate Action Division at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Brazil, to the deliberations on just transition pathways, resulting in the successful establishment of the work programme.
		41.	The SBI and the SBSTA reiterated that the topic of the second hybrid dialogue under the work programme, to be held prior to SB 61, will be decided by the Chairs of the SBI and the SBSTA taking into account submissions from Parties, observers and other non-Party stakeholders and invited the Chairs to consider, in deciding on the topic in a transparent and consultative manner, the outcomes of the first hybrid dialogue and the inputs provided by Parties during the joint contact group on the work programme in the light of the elements contained in paragraph 2 of decision 3/CMA.5.
		42.	The SBI and the SBSTA emphasized working systematically to cover the elements contained in paragraph 2 of decision 3/CMA.5.
		43.	The SBI and the SBSTA also emphasized the importance of ensuring the effective and inclusive participation and active and constructive engagement of Parties and non-Party stakeholders in the second dialogue, and encouraged their Chairs to consider interactive formats for engagement, increasing the participation of non-Party stakeholders, especially from developing countries, and facilitating interaction among participants with a view to informing discussions under the work programme.
		44.	The SBI and the SBSTA emphasized the need to hold the second dialogue organized under the work programme, as per paragraph 5 of decision 3/CMA.5, prior to SB 61 in order for the reports to be made available in a timely manner.
		45.	The SBI and the SBSTA encouraged their Chairs to prepare and publish, starting from the first dialogue and immediately following each dialogue under the work programme, an informal summary of the discussions at that dialogue, including on opportunities, best practices, actionable solutions, challenges and barriers, ensuring that those discussions are reflected in a comprehensive and balanced manner.
		46.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SB 61, taking note of the informal note prepared by the co-chairs for the relevant agenda items at these sessions under their own responsibility, the exchanges of views and inputs by Parties under these agenda items at these sessions, views submitted via the submission portal no later than four weeks prior to SB 61, and the annual summary report on the dialogues with a view to recommending a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption at CMA 6, recognizing that all inputs do not represent consensus among Parties and further work is necessary to finalize the decision.
		47.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs ‎44–‎45 above.
		48.	They requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
VIII.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement*
(Agenda item 8)
	1.	Proceedings
		49.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 60 agenda item 10 in a joint contact group co-chaired by Xolisa Ngwadla (Botswana) and Maria Samuelsen (Denmark). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		50.	The SBI and the SBSTA convened a meeting of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures, at these sessions.
		51.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the forum’s technical events on guidelines and policy frameworks to promote just transition within and across sectors and on understanding the positive and negative impacts of low- and zero-emission transportation technologies, and expressed gratitude to the experts for their contributions to the events.
		52.	The SBI and the SBSTA initiated the development of the five-year workplan of the forum and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures in line with the forum’s functions, work programme and modalities, taking into account relevant policy issues of concern to Parties, referred to in decisions 13/CP.28, 4/CMP.18 and 19/CMA.5.
		53.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue work on this matter at SB 61, taking into account the non-paper prepared by the co-chairs for the relevant agenda items at these sessions available on the UNFCCC website, with a view to recommending a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption at COP 29, CMP 19 and CMA 6 (November 2024).
IX.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security*
(Agenda item 9)
	1.	Proceedings
		54.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 60 agenda item 11 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Annela Anger-Kraavi (Slovakia) and Una May Gordon (Belize). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		55.	The SBI and the SBSTA continued consideration of the Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security. They welcomed the views submitted by Parties and observers on the elements of that joint work, including on topics for the workshops referred to in paragraph 15(b) of decision 3/CP.27 and on the operationalization of the Sharm el-Sheikh online portal referred to in paragraph 16 of that decision.
		56.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat to dedicate time during the workshops referred to in paragraph ‎59 below to coordinate in relation to the joint work, and agreed to include this in the report to COP 31 (November 2026) on the progress and outcomes of the joint work.
		57.	The SBI and the SBSTA recalled paragraph 13 of decision 3/CP.27, in which current and future COP Presidencies, high-level champions and other actors were invited, when promoting climate initiatives, to take into account the conclusions referred to in paragraph 2 of decision 3/CP.27 in considering issues related to agriculture and to promote the sharing of information and knowledge on best practices and means of implementation. They highlighted the potential contribution of current initiatives to the implementation of the joint work and invited the secretariat to include information on progress under and the outcomes of those initiatives in the annual synthesis report referred to in paragraph 15(a) of decision 3/CP.27.
		58.	The SBI and the SBSTA also invited relevant international organizations to submit information on their activities related to the joint work via the Sharm el-Sheikh online portal referred to in paragraph 16 of decision 3/CP.27 by 31 December each year. They requested the secretariat to prepare the annual synthesis report referred to in paragraph 15(a) of decision 3/CP.27 taking into account that information, and to make the annual report available for consideration at the first regular sessions of the subsidiary bodies each year, starting in 2025. They noted that the first annual synthesis report, to be prepared according to the timeline contained in annex II, should cover the period starting from 2013 in order to encompass the implementation of the outcomes of the Koronivia joint work on agriculture and previous activities.
		59.	The SBI and the SBSTA, recalling paragraph 15(b) of decision 3/CP.27, requested the secretariat to hold in-session workshops in hybrid format, facilitating both virtual and in-person participation, in accordance with the road map contained in annex II, and encouraged observers to participate in the workshops. They recalled the request to the secretariat in that same paragraph to invite representatives of the constituted bodies under the Convention, the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, the Adaptation Fund, the Least Developed Countries Fund, the Special Climate Change Fund and observers to participate in the workshops.
		60.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare a report on each of the workshops referred to in paragraph ‎59 above for consideration by the subsidiary bodies at their sessions following the respective workshop.
		61.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal, for each workshop referred to in paragraph ‎59 above, views on the subject of that workshop, options for its format and suggested speakers by the deadline specified in annex II.
		62.	Recalling paragraphs 9–10 of decision 3/CP.27, the SBI and the SBSTA recognized the importance of considering the vulnerability of farmers and other groups vulnerable to climate change impacts, especially small-scale farmers, Indigenous Peoples, local communities, women, youth and children, as well as their knowledge, experience and leadership, in scaling up action and support, including with regard to capacity-building, access to finance, and technology development and transfer.
		63.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat to develop the Sharm el-Sheikh online portal in accordance with the timeline specified in annex II.
		64.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SB 61.
		65.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs ‎56, ‎58, ‎59, ‎60 and ‎63 above.
		66.	They requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
X.	Matters relating to adaptation
(Agenda item 10)
	A.	Matters relating to the global goal on adaptation*
(Agenda sub-item 10(a))
		1.	Proceedings
			67.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 60 agenda sub-item 5(a) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Tina Kobilšek (Slovenia) and Pedro Pedroso (Cuba). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below. Representatives of two Parties made statements.
		2.	Conclusions
			68.	The SBI and the SBSTA initiated consideration of matters relating to the global goal on adaptation and agreed to continue consideration of views, focusing, inter alia, on matters related to paragraph 38(a–e) of decision 2/CMA.5, at SB 61 with a view to providing recommendations for consideration and adoption at CMA 7 (November 2025) at the latest.
			69.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties to submit views on matters related to paragraph 38 of decision 2/CMA.5 via the submission portal by no later than six weeks prior to SB 61.
			70.	The SBI and the SBSTA recalled preambular paragraph 6 of decision 2/CMA.5, which recalls relevant provisions and principles of the Convention and the Paris Agreement.
			71.	The SBI and the SBSTA recognized that means of implementation for adaptation, such as finance, technology transfer and capacity-building, are crucial to the implementation of the United Arab Emirates Framework for Global Climate Resilience, and also recognized that factors such as leadership, institutional arrangements, policies, data and knowledge, skills and education, public participation, and strengthened and inclusive governance are also crucial to enabling the implementation of adaptation action as referred to in paragraphs 24–‍33 of decision 2/CMA.5.
			72.	The SBI and the SBSTA recalled paragraph 22 of decision 2/CMA.5, which recognizes the leadership of Indigenous Peoples and local communities as stewards of nature and encourages ethical and equitable engagement with Indigenous Peoples and local communities and the application of traditional knowledge, the knowledge, wisdom and values of Indigenous Peoples, and local knowledge systems in implementing the United Arab Emirates Framework for Global Climate Resilience.
			73.	The SBI and the SBSTA also recalled paragraph 13 of decision 2/CMA.5, which encourages Parties, when implementing the United Arab Emirates Framework for Global Climate Resilience and their adaptation efforts, when integrating adaptation into relevant socioeconomic and environmental policies and actions and in pursuing the targets referred to in paragraphs 9–10 of the same decision, to take into account, where possible, country-driven, gender-responsive, participatory and fully transparent approaches, as well as human rights approaches, and to ensure intergenerational equity and social justice, taking into consideration vulnerable ecosystems, groups and communities and including children, youth and persons with disabilities.
			74.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the report prepared by the secretariat synthesizing submissions from Parties and observers on matters related to and modalities of the United Arab Emirates–Belém work programme on indicators for measuring progress achieved towards the targets referred to in paragraphs 9–10 of decision 2/CMA.5.
			75.	The SBI and the SBSTA expressed appreciation to their respective Chairs and the secretariat for organizing and to the Government of Bhutan for hosting the workshop, held in Thimphu from 15 to 17 May 2024, on matters related to the United Arab Emirates–Belém work programme.
			76.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties and non-Party stakeholders, including relevant UNFCCC constituted bodies, United Nations organizations and specialized agencies, and other relevant organizations from all geographical regions, to submit via the submission portal by 31 July 2024 information on existing indicators for measuring progress towards the targets referred to in paragraphs 9–10 of decision 2/CMA.5 in use at the local, national, regional and global level, including, if available, information on associated methodologies and data readiness for such indicators, as well as identified gaps and areas for which the development of new indicators may be needed.
			77.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested their Chairs to prepare, with the support of the secretariat, in collaboration with relevant United Nations organizations and specialized agencies, and with contributions from relevant constituted bodies, a compilation and mapping of existing indicators relevant to measuring progress towards the targets referred to in paragraphs 9–10 of decision 2/CMA.5, including information on areas potentially not covered by existing indicators, in advance of the workshop referred to in paragraph ‎89 below, taking into account the submissions referred to in paragraph ‎76 above and the sources of information under the United Arab Emirates Framework for Global Climate Resilience referred to in paragraph 15 of decision 2/CMA.5.
			78.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed that the work under the United Arab Emirates–Belém work programme contributes to the purpose of the United Arab Emirates Framework for Global Climate Resilience, which is defined in paragraph 7 of decision 2/CMA.5 as guiding the achievement of the global goal on adaptation and the review of overall progress in achieving it with a view to reducing the increasing adverse impacts, risks and vulnerabilities associated with climate change, as well as enhancing adaptation action and support.
			79.	The SBI and the SBSTA also agreed that the mapping referred to in paragraph ‎77 above may consider:
			The relevance of the indicators to measuring progress towards one or more of the targets referred to in paragraphs 9–10 of decision 2/CMA.5;
			The specific relevance of the indicators to adaptation, including enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability to climate change;
			Whether quantitative and/or qualitative information applies to the indicators;
			Data availability for the indicators;
			The ability of the indicators to reflect regional, national and local circumstances;
			The applicability of the indicators across different contexts;
			The ease of interpretation of the indicators;
			The clarity of methodologies associated with the indicators;
			The ability of the indicators to be aggregated across levels and disaggregated by demographic and socioeconomic characteristics, such as vulnerability, gender, age, disability, race, socioeconomic status, and status as Indigenous Peoples, as appropriate and depending on national circumstances;
			The indicators’ basis on the best available science;
			The indicators’ basis on traditional knowledge, Indigenous Peoples’ knowledge and local knowledge systems;
			That the indicators should not be used as a basis for comparison between Parties.
			80.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited the Adaptation Committee to prepare a contribution to the compilation and mapping referred to in paragraph ‎77 by identifying information on indicators reported by Parties in their national reports and communications in the context of the work referred to in paragraph 45 of decision 2/CMA.5.
			81.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested their Chairs to convene technical experts to assist in the technical work under the United Arab Emirates–Belém work programme, including reviewing and refining the compilation and mapping of existing indicators referred to in paragraph ‎77 above and, as needed, developing new indicators for measuring progress achieved towards the targets referred to in paragraphs 9–10 of decision 2/CMA.5.
			82.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed that the technical experts referred to in paragraph ‎81 above should have relevant qualifications and expertise related to the targets referred to in paragraphs 9–10 of decision 2/CMA.5 and that experts shall serve in an independent capacity.
			83.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested their Chairs to ensure balance in terms of technical expertise related to the targets referred to in paragraphs 9–10 of decision 2/CMA.5, geographical representation and gender.
			84.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed that the participation of experts will include:
			Experts with balanced and inclusive geographical and gender representation, including experts from small island developing States and the LDCs, taking into account recommendations of Parties, as appropriate, and giving special consideration in terms of support for participation to experts from developing countries eligible for funding under the UNFCCC process;
			Experts from United Nations and other intergovernmental organizations, international and regional organizations, and research and academic institutions with experience in a relevant technical area, taking into account the recommendations of these organizations and institutions;
			Indigenous knowledge holders.
			85.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat, with input from the technical experts, to prepare technical reports, including through work at virtual meetings, containing a list of proposed new indicators for assessing overall progress towards achievement of the targets referred to in paragraphs 9–10 of decision 2/CMA.5 that may be needed to fill any gaps in coverage by existing indicators, as appropriate, by May 2025 for consideration at SB 62 (June 2025).
			86.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to consider issuing regular invitations for submissions from Parties and observers on topics that would inform the technical work under the United Arab Emirates–Belém work programme.
			87.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited interested United Nations organizations and specialized agencies and other relevant organizations to explore the possibility of hosting meetings of technical experts referred to in paragraph ‎81 above, including providing financial support for the meetings.
			88.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to take stock of the work under the United Arab Emirates–Belém work programme, including the assessment of areas not covered by existing indicators and, as needed, the development of new indicators, at SB 61, 62 and 63 (November 2025) with a view to informing the decision on the work programme at CMA 7.
			89.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested their Chairs to organize, with the support of the secretariat, a hybrid workshop for Parties and the technical experts referred to in paragraph ‎81 above, following the completion of the mapping referred to in paragraph ‎77 above and prior to CMA 6, with the aim of:
			Facilitating expert review and refinement of the mapping referred to in paragraph ‎77 above;
			Enabling a dialogue between Parties and the technical experts referred to in paragraph ‎81 above on the mapping and providing an opportunity for the technical experts to clarify the methodologies and assumptions used in refining the mapping;
			Providing Parties with the opportunity to reflect on the outcome of the mapping and on progress in the work on indicators in preparation for CMA 7.
			90.	The SBI and the SBSTA noted that the workshop referred to in paragraph ‎89 above could be organized back to back with a meeting of the Adaptation Committee.
			91.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat to publish the refined mapping of indicators as part of a report on the workshop referred to in paragraph ‎89 above prior to CMA 6.
			92.	The SBI and the SBSTA also requested their Chairs to organize, with the support of the secretariat, two hybrid workshops for Parties, experts and observers under the United Arab Emirates–Belém work programme, one to take stock of the progress of work by the technical experts, to be held in conjunction with SB 62, and one to reflect on the final list of potential indicators to be agreed at CMA 7, to be held between SB 62 and 63.
			93.	The SBI and the SBSTA further requested the secretariat, including through its regional collaboration centres, to disseminate relevant information to help to engage regional organizations and research and academic institutions in the work on indicators.
			94.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat to make the final outputs of the technical work available in the six official languages of the United Nations.
			95.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to consider additional work by the technical experts referred to in paragraph ‎81 above, and associated modalities, at SB 61 with a view to making a recommendation on this matter for consideration at CMA 6.
			96.	The SBI and the SBSTA also agreed to consider any additional activities under the United Arab Emirates–Belém work programme at future sessions of the subsidiary bodies, if needed.
			97.	The SBI and the SBSTA further agreed to continue considering the nature of the final outcome of the United Arab Emirates–Belém work programme at SB 61 and 62, following the mapping referred to in paragraph ‎91 above and the work of the technical experts referred to in paragraph ‎81 above.
			98.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the importance of data readiness assessments in relation to indicators for the targets referred to in paragraphs 9–10 of decision 2/CMA.5 and invited Parties to consider the matter at SB 61.
			99.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the views expressed by Parties at these sessions in relation to the matters described in paragraphs ‎95–‎98 above and in relation to other considerations, which may be considered at SB 61, as appropriate, recognizing that these views do not capture those of all Parties and do not represent consensus.
			100.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs ‎80, ‎89, ‎92 and ‎94 above.
			101.	They requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	B.	Report of the Adaptation Committee and review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee*
(Agenda sub-item 10(b))
		1.	Proceedings
			102.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that its Chair would convene consultations on this sub-item together with the SBSTA Chair for the equally titled SBSTA 60 agenda sub-item 5(b). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			103.	The SBI and the SBSTA recommended that COP 29 and CMA 6 take note of the report of the Adaptation Committee for 2023.
			104.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of the review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee at SB 61.
			105.	The SBI and the SBSTA also agreed to consider the annual report of the Adaptation Committee and the review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee under two separate agenda sub-items at future sessions.
	C.	National adaptation plans 
(Agenda sub-item 10(c))
		1.	Proceedings
			106.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Antwi Boasiako Amoah (Ghana) and Jens Fugl (Denmark). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			107.	The SBI welcomed:
			The submissions from Parties and relevant organizations and the synthesis report by the secretariat on progress towards the achievement of the objectives of the process to formulate and implement NAPs, as well as experience, best practices, lessons learned, gaps and needs, and support provided and received;
			The report by the LEG in collaboration with the Adaptation Committee, prepared with the support of the secretariat, on progress in the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
			108.	The SBI expressed appreciation to the Government of Bangladesh for hosting the NAP Expo in Dhaka from 22 to 25 April 2024 and the meeting of Party experts referred to in paragraph 3(d) of decision 3/CP.26 that was held in conjunction therewith.
			109.	The SBI welcomed the outcomes of the discussions held at the meeting of Party experts referred to in paragraph ‎108 above and emphasized the importance of continuing the assessment of progress in the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
			110.	The SBI took note of the informal note prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda sub-item at this session. It decided to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 61 taking into consideration, in particular, that informal note with the aim of recommending a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 29.
XI.	Matters relating to the least developed countries 
(Agenda item 11)
	1.	Proceedings
		111.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Jens Fugl and Ephraim Shitima (Zambia). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		112.	The SBI welcomed the report on the 45th meeting of the LEG, held in Bujumbura, Burundi, from 20 to 23 February 2024.
		113.	The SBI also welcomed the successful conduct of the NAP Expo in Dhaka, Bangladesh, from 22 to 25 April 2024 and acknowledged that the Expos continue to provide a platform for stakeholders to exchange experience and establish partnerships relevant to advancing the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
		114.	The SBI noted the high-level transformational dialogue on NAPs hosted by the UNFCCC Executive Secretary that took place on 22 April 2024 as part of the above-mentioned NAP Expo.
		115.	The SBI expressed appreciation to the Government of Burundi for hosting LEG 45 and to the Government of Bangladesh for hosting, as well as to the organizations, bodies, and regional centres and networks involved in organizing, the above-mentioned NAP Expo.
		116.	The SBI also expressed appreciation to the LEG and the secretariat for their invaluable work in supporting the LDCs, including in helping them to have in place national adaptation plans, policies and planning processes by 2025 and to have progressed in implementing them by 2030 in line with paragraph 59 of decision 1/CMA.5.
		117.	The SBI recalled paragraph 46 of decision 1/CP.21 in relation to expediting support for the LDCs to formulate and implement NAPs.
		118.	The SBI welcomed the rolling work programme of the LEG for 2024–2025.
		119.	The SBI also welcomed the inclusion of activities related to the United Arab Emirates Framework for Global Climate Resilience in the rolling work programme of the LEG for 2024–2025, namely supporting the implementation of the Framework with technical guidance and training materials and contributing to the implementation of the United Arab Emirates–Belém work programme on indicators for measuring progress achieved towards the targets referred to in paragraphs 9–10 of decision 2/CMA.5.
		120.	The SBI noted that, as at 7 June 2024:
		The LDCs had submitted a total of 46 readiness proposals to the GCF for funding for formulating NAPs or for other adaptation planning processes, of which 32, amounting to a total of USD 74 million, had been approved and for 29 of which the disbursement of funds had started;
		Of the 45 LDCs, 22 had prepared and submitted NAPs, 16 were preparing NAPs and expected to submit them in 2024–2025, 5 had not yet started formulating NAPs, and information on NAP formulation from 2 LDCs was pending;
		All 22 LDCs that had submitted NAPs had also submitted proposals for accessing funding from the GCF for implementing priority actions identified therein, and proposals from 20 of them had been approved for such funding.
		121.	The SBI welcomed the submission by Canada and New Zealand of a national adaptation strategy and a NAP respectively, and invited other developed country Parties to submit NAPs and relevant strategies on NAP Central with a view to promoting exchange of experience, lessons learned and best practices in relation to adaptation planning and implementation.
		122.	The SBI noted that, as at 31 December 2023, 40 LDCs had drafted a total of 92 project ideas under the NAP implementation pipeline development initiative, of which 4 countries had developed their project ideas into concept notes, two of which (by Central African Republic and Togo) had been submitted to the GCF and two (by Bhutan and Rwanda) to the LDCF that were approved for funding. Six project ideas from four other LDCs (Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Madagascar and Sudan) had been developed into concept notes but not yet submitted for approval for funding.
		123.	The SBI welcomed the revision of the strategy for the GCF Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme, took note that the LDCs continue to face challenges in accessing support for the formulation and implementation of NAPs, and underscored the importance of enhancing efforts to convert concept notes into funding proposals.
		124.	The SBI noted that the GEF has provided grant funding of USD 257 million for 25 adaptation projects in the LDCs through the LDCF since the start of the eighth replenishment of the GEF in July 2022.
		125.	The SBI also noted that, as at 10 June 2024, the GCF had provided grant funding of USD 1.067 billion for 46 adaptation single- and multi-country projects in the LDCs since its inception in 2010.
		126.	The SBI further noted that, as at 10 June 2024, the Adaptation Fund had provided grant funding of USD 408 million for 41 LDCs through single-country and regional projects since its inception in 2001.
		127.	The SBI noted the recommendations provided by the LEG for addressing the challenges, gaps and needs faced by the LDCs that have not yet initiated NAP formulation.
		128.	The SBI encouraged the LDCs and agencies supporting them in formulating and implementing NAPs to make use of the LDC roster of experts on NAPs for addressing needs for technical capacity using endogenous capacity.
		129.	The SBI recalled paragraph 21 of decision 5/CP.17, and urged developed country Parties to continue to mobilize financial support for the NAP process for the LDCs through bilateral and multilateral channels, including through the LDCF, in accordance with decision 1/CP.16.
		130.	The SBI noted that the LEG plans to discuss at LEG 46 the results of its survey of the LDCs, the GCF and other relevant actors to identify the challenges, gaps and needs faced by the LDCs in having adaptation projects approved for funding by national direct access entities with a view to preparing findings for consideration at SBI 61.
		131.	The SBI welcomed the meeting convened virtually on 16 May 2024 by the LEG with the Adaptation Fund Board, the GCF and GEF secretariats and other relevant organizations to identify ways to assist the LDCs in expeditiously implementing adaptation action based on priorities identified in their NAPs.
		132.	The SBI also welcomed and encouraged the continued collaboration between the LEG and the Adaptation Committee and other constituted bodies, partners of the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change and a range of other organizations, agencies, and regional centres and networks on supporting the LDCs in undertaking adaptation and on other relevant work under the Convention and the Paris Agreement.
		133.	The SBI acknowledged and congratulated the Government of Bhutan on the graduation of the country from LDC status as of 14 December 2023.
		134.	The SBI reiterated the importance of ensuring support for the smooth transition of countries graduating from LDC status.
		135.	The SBI invited Parties and relevant organizations to continue providing resources for supporting implementation of the LEG work programme.
		136.	It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
XII.	Terms of reference for the 2024 review of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts*
(Agenda item 12)
	1.	Proceedings
		137.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 60 agenda item 6 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Pepetua Latasi (Tuvalu) and Meredith Ryder-Rude (United States of America). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		138.	The SBI and the SBSTA finalized the terms of reference for the 2024 review of the WIM, as contained in annex I.
		139.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to undertake that review at SB 61 on the basis of those terms of reference and to forward the outcomes to the appropriate governing body or bodies for consideration.
		140.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties and non-Party stakeholders to submit via the submission portal by 30 September 2024, in order to serve as input to the 2024 review of the WIM, inter alia:
		Views on strengths, weaknesses, gaps, challenges and opportunities related to enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of the WIM;
		Views on the use and usefulness of the outputs of the WIM and the usefulness of activities under the WIM;
		Views on improvements of the WIM and the implementation of its functions;
		Other inputs on how the WIM can promote the implementation of approaches to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with climate change impacts.
		141.	The SBI and the SBSTA encouraged Parties to consult their loss and damage contact points in preparing the submissions referred to in paragraph ‎140 above, as appropriate.
		142.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare a summary of the views referred to in paragraph ‎140 above to serve as input to the 2024 review of the WIM.
		143.	The SBI and the SBSTA also requested the secretariat to prepare a background paper to inform the 2024 review of the WIM, with the paper to include information on the status of work, activities and outputs under the WIM, covering:
		Relevant decisions and mandates;
		Institutional arrangements relating to loss and damage established since the 2019 review of the WIM, including those of the expert groups, the technical expert group and the task force under the WIM and the engagement of loss and damage contact points;
		Progress of implementation of the workplan of the WIM Executive Committee and the plans of action of its expert groups, technical expert group and task force;
		Progress of operationalization of the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change in all regions, including consideration of the reports on the regional scoping workshops that took place in 2023;
		Implementation under the WIM of mandates and recommendations arising from the 2019 review of the WIM and relevant outcomes of the first global stocktake, as set out in decision 1/CMA.5.
		144.	The SBI and the SBSTA further requested the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies, to organize an event, to be held in conjunction with SB 61, to provide inputs to the 2024 review of the WIM through engagement of Parties and non-Party stakeholders in structured discussions taking into account the terms of reference for the review.
		145.	The SBI and the SBSTA noted the discussions that took place among Parties at these sessions relating to representation on the WIM Executive Committee.
		146.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs ‎142–‎144 above.
		147.	They requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
XIII.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism 
(Agenda item 13)
	148.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Peter Govindasamy (Singapore) and Stephen Minas (Greece).
	149.	The SBI considered linkages, collaboration and cooperation between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism taking into account the submissions thereon from Parties and other stakeholders, the synthesis report by the secretariat and the in-session workshop.
	150.	At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 61 taking into account the draft text prepared for this agenda item on the UNFCCC website with a view to recommending a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 29.
XIV.	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund 
(Agenda item 14)
	151.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ralph Bodle (Germany) and Amena Yauvoli (Fiji).
	152.	At its 3rd meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that Parties could not conclude consideration of this matter at this session. In accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBI 61.
XV.	Matters relating to capacity-building 
(Agenda item 15)
	1.	Proceedings
		153.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co- facilitated by Cristina Carreiras (European Union) and Nathalie Flores González (Dominican Republic). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
	Matters relating to capacity-building under the Convention
	Annual monitoring of the implementation of the capacity-building framework
		154.	The SBI welcomed the synthesis reports prepared by the secretariat on the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries established under decision 2/CP.7, and the capacity-building work of bodies established under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol.
		155.	The SBI acknowledged the progress in implementing the framework for capacity-building in developing countries under the Convention at the individual, institutional and systemic level.
		156.	The SBI reiterated that needs and gaps remain in addressing the priority issues identified in the framework for capacity-building in developing countries, particularly in addressing the capacity needs and gaps of the LDCs and small island developing States.
		157.	The SBI noted that further efforts are needed to address current and emerging capacity-building gaps and needs related to implementing the Paris Agreement in developing countries that are outside the current scope of the capacity-building framework under the Convention.
		158.	The SBI emphasized the importance of the capacity-building portal and the Durban Forum on capacity-building as means of effectively and continuously sharing information, good practices and lessons learned among a wide range of stakeholders under and outside the Convention.
		159.	The SBI noted with appreciation the outcomes of the 13th Durban Forum on capacity-building, held at this session, on capacity-building for addressing gaps and needs for accessing finance for national adaptation plans.
	Terms of reference for the fifth comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries under the Convention
		160.	The SBI recommended a draft decision on the terms of reference for the fifth comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries under the Convention for consideration and adoption at COP 29.
	Matters relating to capacity-building under the Convention and the Paris Agreement
		Second review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building
			161.	The SBI recommended draft decisions on the second review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building for consideration and adoption at COP 29 and CMA 6.
	Matters relating to capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol
		Annual monitoring of the implementation of the capacity-building framework
			162.	The SBI welcomed the synthesis reports prepared by the secretariat on the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries established under decision 2/CP.7, and reaffirmed in decision 29/CMP.1, and the capacity-building work of bodies established under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol.
			163.	The SBI reiterated that, while progress has been made in implementing the framework for capacity-building in developing countries under the Kyoto Protocol, needs and gaps remain in addressing the priority areas set out in paragraph 2 of decision 29/CMP.1.
			164.	The SBI emphasized the importance of the capacity-building portal and the Durban Forum on capacity-building as means of effectively and continuously sharing information, good practices and lessons learned among a wide range of stakeholders under and outside the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol.
			165.	The SBI noted with appreciation the outcomes of the 13th Durban Forum, held at this session, on capacity-building for addressing gaps and needs for accessing finance for national adaptation plans.
			166.	The SBI highlighted the importance of considering the outcomes of the fifth comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries under the Convention as an input to the fourth review of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries under the Kyoto Protocol.
XVI.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings 
(Agenda item 16)
	1.	Proceedings
		167.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in a contact group chaired by the SBI Chair. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		168.	The SBI took note of the document on arrangements for intergovernmental meetings prepared for this session.
		169.	The SBI emphasized the importance of openness, transparency, inclusiveness and adhering to established decision-making practices in making arrangements for sessions of the governing and subsidiary bodies.
		170.	The SBI welcomed the continued efforts of the COP 28 Presidency, the incoming COP 29 Presidency and the presiding officers of the subsidiary bodies to ensure efficiency, coordination, coherence, management and due process in the consideration of issues under discussion, including mandated events. The SBI encouraged them, as well as future presiding officers, to continue to enhance efforts in this regard.
		171.	Emphasizing the need to ensure efficient time management during sessions of the governing and subsidiary bodies, the SBI requested presiding officers of the governing and subsidiary bodies, with the support of the secretariat, to continue to enhance efforts in this regard.
		(a)	Preparations for the twenty-ninth session of the Conference of the Parties, the nineteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the sixth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
			172.	The SBI noted with appreciation the preparations by the Government of Azerbaijan to ensure the success of the United Nations Climate Change Conference to be held there from 11 to 22 November 2024, which will include COP 29, CMP 19, CMA 6 and SB 61.
			173.	The SBI noted that the Government of Azerbaijan will invite Heads of State and Government to attend the World Leaders Summit to be held from 12 to 13 November 2024.
			174.	The SBI invited the incoming Presidency of COP 29, CMP 19 and CMA 6, in consultation with the secretariat and the Bureau, to finalize the details of the arrangements for the Conference and to keep Parties informed thereof.
			175.	The SBI requested the secretariat to take note of the views of Parties on the possible elements of the provisional agendas for COP 29, CMP 19 and CMA 6.
			176.	The SBI recalled its invitation to the secretariat to make arrangements for the delivery of concise national statements by ministers and other heads of delegation during the high-level segment of the Conference with a recommended time limit of three minutes, and statements by representatives of observer organizations with a recommended time limit of two minutes. The SBI also recalled its encouragement to Parties and observer organizations to keep within their respective time allocations.
		Hosts of future sessions
			177.	The SBI noted that, in keeping with the principle of rotation among the United Nations regional groups, the President of COP 31 would come from the Western European and other States. The SBI urged the Western European and other States to accelerate their consultations with a view to presenting an offer to host COP 31 as soon as possible and no later than at SBI 62 (June 2025) in order to facilitate timely planning.
			178.	The SBI noted that, in keeping with the principle of rotation among the United Nations regional groups, the President of COP 32 (November 2027) would come from the African States. The SBI encouraged the African States to finalize their consultations and submit an offer to host COP 32 as soon as possible and no later than at SBI 64 (June 2026) in order to facilitate early planning.
			179.	The SBI noted that, in keeping with the principle of rotation among the United Nations regional groups, the President of COP 33 (2028) would come from the Asia-Pacific States. The SBI encouraged the Asia-Pacific States to finalize their consultations and submit an offer to host COP 33 as soon as possible and no later than at SBI 66 (June 2027) in order to facilitate early planning.
			180.	The SBI reiterated that confirming the host country for a session of the COP as far in advance of the conference as possible minimizes logistical and financial risks and enables the secretariat to facilitate timely planning.
			181.	The SBI highlighted the importance of ensuring the full participation of Parties and the effective and meaningful participation of observer organizations in sessions of the governing and subsidiary bodies and mandated events. It emphasized that the secretariat and hosts of sessions and mandated events should make logistical arrangements that will facilitate the inclusive and effective participation of Parties and observer organizations, including timely issuance of visas, where required, to all participants; availability of affordable accommodation; a safe and secure conference venue for all; and ease of access to the venue.
			182.	The SBI noted with concern the difficulties experienced by some delegates in obtaining visas to enable them to attend sessions of the governing and subsidiary bodies, and mandated events convened at the seat of the secretariat.
			183.	The SBI affirmed the importance of adhering to the equal treatment of the six official languages of the United Nations.
			184.	The SBI highlighted that virtual access and webcasting can enhance the inclusivity and transparency of the UNFCCC process and requested the secretariat and future hosts of sessions and mandated events to enhance virtual access to the best of their ability and subject to the availability of financial resources, while noting that it is not mandatory and acknowledging the associated challenges and opportunities.
			185.	The SBI encouraged hosts of sessions of the governing and subsidiary bodies and mandated events to reaffirm their commitment to upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international human rights law before, during and after the sessions and mandated events. The SBI emphasized the importance of ensuring that participants can exercise human rights without fear of intimidation and repercussions.
			186.	The SBI noted progress by the secretariat regarding the Code of Conduct for UNFCCC events, relevant UNFCCC standard operating procedures and efforts to provide safe and secure conference venues for participants. The SBI highlighted the importance of participants abiding by the Code of Conduct at all sessions and events and respecting the national laws of the host country outside of those venues.
			187.	The SBI recalled that host country agreements should reflect the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the respective obligations under international human rights law, and facilitate the inclusive and effective participation of Parties and observer organizations, with a view to ensuring that sessions and mandated events are convened in places where human rights and fundamental freedoms are promoted and protected, and where all participants are effectively protected against any violations or abuses, including harassment and sexual harassment.
			188.	The SBI noted that, to ensure transparency, host country agreements for sessions of the COP should be made publicly available, consistent with the Charter of the United Nations and relevant United Nations regulations.
		Calendar of future sessions
			189.	The SBI recommended the following dates for the sessional periods in 2028 for consideration and adoption at COP 29:
				(a)	First sessional period: Monday, 5 June, to Thursday, 15 June;
				(b)	Second sessional period: Monday, 6 November, to Friday, 17 November.
			190.	The SBI also recommended the following dates for the sessional periods in 2029 for consideration and adoption at COP 29:
				(a)	First sessional period: Monday, 4 June, to Thursday, 14 June;
				(b)	Second sessional period: Monday, 5 November, to Friday, 16 November.
		Increasing the efficiency of the UNFCCC process
			191.	The SBI welcomed the rich exchange of views among Parties at this session on increasing efficiency in the UNFCCC process, including the streamlining of the agendas of the governing and subsidiary bodies informed by submissions and a technical paper.
			192.	The SBI invited Parties and observer organizations to submit via the submission portal by 31 March 2025 views on the matters referred to in paragraph ‎‎191 ‎above.
			193.	The SBI requested the secretariat to prepare an information paper for consideration at SBI 62 that includes visualizing the operationalization of the options contained in the submissions and the technical paper referred to in paragraph ‎191 ‎above and the submissions referred to in paragraph ‎‎192 above.
			194.	The SBI decided to continue consideration of the matter of increasing the efficiency of the UNFCCC process towards enhancing ambition and strengthening implementation at SBI 62.
			195.	The SBI noted with appreciation the note by the secretariat on the implications of changing the frequency of sessions of the governing bodies and the related submissions from Parties.
			196.	The SBI requested the secretariat to prepare an updated version of the information paper referred to in paragraph ‎195 ‎above for consideration at SBI 68 (2028).
		Observer engagement
			197.	The SBI welcomed the information on enhancing engagement of observer organizations, including on the implementation by the secretariat in 2022–2023 of the SBI conclusions on the matter.
			198.	The SBI reaffirmed the value of substantive contributions from observer organizations for achieving ambitious outcomes in the UNFCCC process.
			199.	The SBI took note of the significant increase in the number of observer organizations admitted to the UNFCCC process at recent sessions of the COP and the associated challenges in ensuring their meaningful participation therein, including regional imbalance.
			200.	The SBI welcomed the exchange of views among Parties at this session on options for increasing the participation of observer organizations from developing countries, informed by the technical paper prepared by the secretariat. The SBI recognized that developing countries form the majority of underrepresented regions for observer organizations admitted to the UNFCCC process.
			201.	To ensure open, inclusive and meaningful observer engagement in the face of an increasing number of admitted observer organizations, while fully preserving and respecting the Party-driven nature of the UNFCCC process and ensuring alignment with the draft rules of procedure being applied, the SBI took note of the views provided by Parties and observer organizations, and highlighted the following existing and additional practices and steps for engaging observers, subject to the availability of financial resources and while increasing the participation of observer organizations from underrepresented regions:
			Recommending that current and incoming COP Presidencies:
			Ensure open, inclusive and meaningful engagement of observer organizations in the lead-up to, during and after sessions of the COP in terms of both logistical and accessibility arrangements and engagement opportunities;
			Continue to increase the engagement of observer organizations, particularly organizations from underrepresented regions and organizations for children and youth, Indigenous Peoples and women and gender, in Presidency initiatives and events;
			Increase intervention opportunities for observer organizations at meetings and make the best use of their inputs, including submissions;
			Recommending that the presiding officers, co-chairs and co-facilitators, as applicable, of the governing bodies, the subsidiary bodies, UNFCCC constituted bodies and work programmes encourage Parties to ensure at UNFCCC meetings and events that adequate time is available for interventions from observer organizations, particularly for agenda items related to observer engagement;
			Encouraging all Parties to:
			Enhance the engagement of observer organizations to enable exchange of more varied views on substantive issues, while maintaining gender balance among participants;
			Consider developing capacity-building initiatives for observer organizations, particularly organizations from underrepresented regions and organizations for children and youth, Indigenous Peoples, and women and gender;
			Consider improving time management of meetings with a view to enabling the nine constituencies of non-governmental organizations to deliver short interventions at meetings on agenda items related to observer engagement;
			Requesting the secretariat to:
			Report back to SBI 62 on the follow-up in relation to this paragraph and explore further technical measures to facilitate the engagement of a broad range of observer organizations in sessions in the face of the increasing number of admitted observer organizations, subject to the availability of financial resources;
			Consider making available detailed information on the distribution of regional presence among observer organizations at sessions of the COP;
			Continue taking administrative measures to encourage a more diverse representation of observer organizations and to consider opportunities to enhance participation of observer organizations, such as through undertaking capacity-building activities as regards procedures for observer participation and engagement, in particular for organizations from underrepresented regions;
			Prioritize assessment of applications for admission of observer organizations from the regions of the incoming COP Presidencies, taking into consideration observer organizations from underrepresented regions.
			202.	The SBI noted the importance of financial resources for the impactful engagement of observer organizations, in particular those from underrepresented regions.
			203.	The SBI took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs ‎‎193, ‎196 and ‎‎201(d)(i–iii) above.
			204.	It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
XVII.	Gender and climate change 
(Agenda item 17)
	1.	Proceedings
		205.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Angela Ebeleke (Democratic Republic of the Congo) and Marc-André Lafrance (Canada). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		206.	The SBI initiated the final review of the implementation of the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan, starting with consideration of the work programme.
		207.	The SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 61 on the basis of the draft text prepared for this agenda item at this session with a view to recommending a draft decision thereon for consideration and adoption at COP 29.
XVIII.	Matters relating to Action for Climate Empowerment 
(Agenda item 18)
	208.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Pemy Gasela (South Africa) and Arne Riedel (Germany).
	209.	The SBI considered the 2023 summary report by the secretariat on progress in implementing activities under the Glasgow work programme on Action for Climate Empowerment.
	210.	At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 61 taking into account the informal note prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda item at this session.
XIX.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters 
(Agenda item 19)
	211.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in a contact group co-chaired by Gabriela Blatter (Switzerland) and Zita Kassa Wilks (Gabon).
	212.	At its 3rd meeting, the SBI recommended draft decisions for consideration and adoption at COP 29 and CMP 19.
XX.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 20)
	213.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. No other matters were raised.
XXI.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 21)
	1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
		214.	At the 3rd meeting, a representative of the secretariat informed the SBI that several activities resulting from the conclusions adopted at this session require additional resources over and above the core budget for the biennium 2024–2025. Relevant requests for activities are contained in conclusions adopted under various SBI, including joint SBI–SBSTA, agenda items.
		215.	Under joint SBI agenda item 7 and SBSTA agenda item 9, “United Arab Emirates just transition work programme”, supplementary funding of EUR 45,000 will be required in 2024–2025 to prepare an annual synthesis report, organize in-session workshops in hybrid format and prepare a report on each workshop.
		216.	Under joint SBI agenda item 9 and SBSTA agenda item 11, “Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security”, supplementary funding of EUR 164,000 will be required in 2024 and EUR 242,000 in 2025 to develop the Sharm el-Sheikh online portal, organize in-session workshops and prepare a synthesis report.
		217.	Under joint SBI agenda sub-item 10(a) and SBSTA agenda sub-item 5(a), “Matters relating to the global goal on adaptation”, supplementary funding of EUR 627,000 will be required in 2024–2025 to organize three workshops in hybrid format under the United Arab Emirates–Belém work programme and to make the final outputs of the technical work available in the official languages of the United Nations.
		218.	Under joint SBI agenda item 12 and SBSTA agenda item 6, “Terms of reference for the 2024 review of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts”, supplementary funding of EUR 62,000 will be required in 2024 to prepare outputs and summaries to inform the 2024 review of the WIM and to organize an event to be held at SB 61.
		219.	Under agenda item 15, “Matters relating to capacity-building”, funding of EUR 33,000 will be required in 2025 to prepare a technical report to inform the fifth comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries; the estimated requirements will be absorbed within available resources.
		220.	Under agenda item 16, “Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings”, funding of EUR 826,000 will be required in 2024–2025 to prepare a technical paper, increase and report on participation and regional representation of observer organizations at sessions of the governing and subsidiary bodies, take measures to encourage diverse representation, particularly for organizations from underrepresented regions, and arrange virtual access and webcasting for mandated events to enhance the inclusivity and transparency of the UNFCCC process.
		221.	Under agenda item 19, “Administrative, financial and institutional matters”, supplementary funding of EUR 137,000 in 2024 and EUR 205,000 in 2025 will be required to prepare quarterly reports on the extent to which the core and supplementary budgets are funded, to update documents on standard costs in advance of SBI 62 and to significantly improve the transparency of the secretariat’s budget management process.
		222.	Activities newly mandated under agenda items 7, 9, 16 and 19 include recurring or long-term activities and those under agenda items 9, 10(a), 12 and 15 include short-term or temporary activities according to the categorization established for the UNFCCC budget.
		223.	The representative of the secretariat noted that the presented amounts, totalling EUR 2.3 million, are preliminary and based on information available at the time. The representative also noted that the secretariat is counting on the continued generosity of Parties to provide supplementary funding for these activities in a timely and predictable manner as without such contributions it will be a challenge for the secretariat to provide the requested support.
		224.	The representative concluded by noting that costs for 2026 and beyond will be reviewed in the context of preparing the budget for the biennium 2026–2027.
	2.	Closure of and report on the session
		225.	At the 4th meeting of the SBI, held together with the 4th meeting of SBSTA 60, on 13 June, statements were made by representatives of 25 Parties, including 14 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; AILAC; AOSIS; Arab Group; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – People’s Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; EIG; EU and its member States; Group of 77 and China; Group SUR (formerly Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay); LDCs; LMDCs; Mountain Partnership; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of eight UNFCCC NGO constituencies: business and industry, children and youth, environmental, farmers and agricultural, research and independent, and trade union NGOs, Indigenous Peoples organizations, and women and gender constituency.
		226.	At the 5th meeting of the SBI, held together with the 5th meeting of SBSTA 60, on 13 June, the SBI considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session and make it available to Parties.
		227.	The Chair thanked all Parties and observers for their constructive engagement throughout the session. He also thanked the co-chairs of contact groups and co-facilitators of informal consultations for their work, the other presiding officers for their close collaboration and the translators, technicians and World Conference Center Bonn staff for their support and facilitation. The Chair then closed the session.
			
	Annex I
	Terms of reference for the 2024 review of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
XXII.	Mandate
	228.	Decisions 4/CP.22 and 2/CMA.2, paragraph 46, provide recommendations regarding the 2024 review of the WIM.
XXIII.	Objective
	229.	During the 2024 review, Parties will consider, inter alia, progress in implementing the functions of the WIM, as set out in decision 2/CP.19, and the performance of and achievements facilitated by those functions; progress in achieving the long-term vision of the WIM; progress in implementing the activities of the WIM Executive Committee and those under the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change; and ways in which the WIM may be enhanced and strengthened, as appropriate, in the light of the current context in which the WIM is implemented, to promote implementation of approaches to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change.
XXIV.	Scope
	230.	Parties will review the WIM since its 2019 review, taking into account the broader context of work on averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement; the segments of the population that are already vulnerable, as set out in paragraph 7(a)(iii) of decision 3/CP.18; and the evolving needs and priorities of developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.
	231.	The review will focus on, inter alia:
	The performance of the WIM and its functions as set out in decision 2/CP.19, and how it can continue to be fit-for-purpose to promote the implementation of approaches to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage;
	The structure of the WIM, including its Executive Committee and its Santiago network;
	The usefulness, use, development and dissemination of the outputs of the WIM, including in relation to developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change;
	Collaboration, coordination, partnerships and coherence and synergies of work under the WIM in relation to bodies, entities and work programmes, including the funding arrangements, including a fund, for responding to loss and damage referred to in paragraphs 2–3 of decisions 2/CP.27 and 2/CMA.4, and with stakeholders under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement;
	The progress of implementation of the workplan of the WIM Executive Committee, including in relation to outreach and communication, and the work programme of the Santiago network in relation to implementing the functions of the WIM;
	The response under the WIM to relevant decisions and the Paris Agreement.
	232.	In their assessment, Parties will consider:
	The effectiveness and efficiency of the work under the WIM, including of its Executive Committee, expert groups, technical expert group, task force and Santiago network, regarding, inter alia, timeliness, relevance, usefulness, visibility, coherence, complementarity, synergies, comprehensiveness, responsiveness and resourcing;
	Barriers and gaps, challenges and opportunities, good practices and lessons learned in the context of the implementation of the WIM.
XXV.	Inputs and sources of information
	233.	Being guided by the best available science, Indigenous Peoples’ knowledge and the knowledge systems of local communities, the inputs to the review are as follows:
	The background paper referred to in paragraph ‎143 of this document;
	The annual reports and outputs of the WIM Executive Committee, and the joint report of the Executive Committee and the Santiago network;
	The views relevant to the WIM submitted by Parties and non-Party stakeholders referred to in paragraph ‎140 of this document;
	The summary of the views as referred to in paragraph ‎142 of this document;
	The workplan of the WIM Executive Committee and the work programme of the Santiago network;
	Relevant decisions and the Paris Agreement.
	234.	Sources of information for the review may include:
	Relevant scientific and technical reports of national, regional and international organizations;
	Relevant national and regional strategies, plans and reports;
	Relevant outputs of constituted bodies and from events organized in the UNFCCC process, including the Glasgow dialogue and the summary reports thereon.
	235.	An event will be organized by the secretariat, to be held in conjunction with and at the start of SB 61, to provide inputs for the review through engagement of Parties and non-Party stakeholders in structured discussions taking into account these terms of reference.
XXVI.	Modalities
	236.	The modalities to be used in conducting the review are:
	The call for the submissions referred to in paragraph 6(c) above;
	The consideration by Parties of the above-mentioned inputs and sources of information in the light of the objective and scope of the review.
XXVII.	Expected output
	237.	On the basis of the assessment of progress undertaken in accordance with paragraphs ‎1–‎9 above, a draft decision will be prepared at SB 61, including a set of recommendations that respond to the objective of the review as referred to in paragraph ‎2 above.
	238.	
	Annex II
	Road map for the Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security
		| Timeline | Activities |
		| Between SB 60 and 61 (November 2024) | Development of the Sharm el-Sheikh online portal by the secretariat |
		| SB 61 | Presentation of the Sharm el-Sheikh online portal by the secretariat |
		| Between SB 61 and 62 (June 2025) | Submissions from Parties and observers, by 1 March 2025, on the workshop on topic 1: systemic and holistic approaches to the implementation of climate action on agriculture, food systems and food security, understanding, cooperation and integration into plans |
		|  | Preparation by the secretariat of the first annual synthesis report under the joint work |
		|  | Further development of the Sharm el-Sheikh online portal by the secretariat |
		| SB 62 | Workshop on topic 1, including time to coordinate in relation to the joint work |
		|  | Consideration of the first annual synthesis report |
		|  | Further consideration of the online portal |
		| Between SB 62 and 63 (November 2025) | Preparation by the secretariat of the report on the workshop on topic 1 |
		| SB 63 | Consideration of the report on the workshop on topic 1 |
		| Between SB 63 and 64 (June 2026) | Submissions from Parties and observers, by 1 March 2026, on the workshop on topic 2: progress, challenges and opportunities related to identifying needs and accessing means of implementation for climate action on agriculture and food security, including sharing of best practices |
		|  | Preparation by the secretariat of the annual synthesis report |
		| SB 64 | Workshop on topic 2, including time to coordinate in relation to the joint work |
		|  | Consideration of the annual synthesis report |
		| Between SB 64 and 65 (November 2026) | Preparation by the secretariat of the report on the workshop on topic 2 |
		| SB 65 | Consideration of the report on the workshop on topic 2 |
		|  | Finalization of discussions on the progress and outcomes of the joint work for reporting thereon to COP 31 (November 2026) |
		
		
