|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBI/2015/22 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 29 January 2016  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Implementation
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its forty-third session, held in Paris from 1 to 4 December 2015
	
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session
		(Agenda item 1)		1–2	4
		II.	Organizational matters
		(Agenda item 2)		3–10	4
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		3–5	4
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		6	6
			C.	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international
assessment and review process		7–8	6
		D.	Election of officers other than the Chair		9–10	6
		III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda item 3)		11–22	7
			A.	Status of submission and review of sixth national communications and
first biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		11	7
			B.	Outcome of the first round of the international assessment and
review process (2014–2015)		12–13	7
			C.	Revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications
by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC 
reporting guidelines on national communications”		14–20	7
			D.	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included
in Annex I to the Convention for the period 1990–2013		21	8
			E.	Annual compilation and accounting report for Annex B Parties 
under the Kyoto Protocol for 2015		22	8
		IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda item 4)		23–42	9
			A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not 
included in Annex I to the Convention (agenda item held in abeyance)			9
			B.	Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications
from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention		23–30	9
		C.	Provision of financial and technical support		31–41	11
			D.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of
Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention		42	12
		V.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol
		(Agenda item 5)		43–52	12
		A.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism	43–45	12
		B.	Review of the joint implementation guidelines		46–48	13
			C.	Modalities for expediting the continued issuance, transfer and acquisition 
of joint implementation emission reduction units		49–51	13
			D.	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under
the Kyoto Protocol		52	14
		VI.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
		(Agenda item 6)		53–63	14
		VII.	National adaptation plans
		(Agenda item 7)		64–66	15
		VIII.	Report of the Adaptation Committee
		(Agenda item 8)		67–68	16
			IX.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism 
for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 9).		69–70	16
			X.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the 
Technology Mechanism
(Agenda item 10)		71–79	17
				A.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the
Climate Technology Centre and Network		71–72	17
		B.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer		73–79	17
		XI.	Capacity-building
		(Agenda item 11)		80–83	18
		A.	Capacity-building under the Convention		80–81	18
		B.	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol		82–83	18
		XII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
		(Agenda item 12)		84–89	19
		A.	Forum and work programme		84–87	19
		B.	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol		88	19
		C.	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10		89	20
		XIII.	The 2013–2015 review
		(Agenda item 13)		90	20
			XIV.	Gender and climate change
(Agenda item 14)		91–101	20
		XV.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
		(Agenda item 15)		102–105	22
		A.	Budget performance for the biennium 2014–2015		102–103	22
		B.	Audit report and financial statements for 2014		104–105	22
			XVI.	Report on other activities: summary report on the 3rd Dialogue on Article 6
of the Convention
(Agenda item 16)		106	22
		XVII.	Other matters
		(Agenda item 17)		107	22
		XVIII.	Closure of and report on the session
		(Agenda item 18)		108–115	23
		Annex
			Summary reports on multilateral assessments at the forty-third session of
the Subsidiary Body for Implementation		24
			
		
	I.	Opening of the session
		(Agenda item 1)
		1.	The forty-third session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) was held at the United Nations Climate Change Conference, Paris–Le Bourget, France, from 1 to 4 December 2015.
		2.	The Chair of the SBI, Mr. Amena Yauvoli (Fiji), opened the session on Tuesday, 1 December, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Mr. Guoshun Sun (China) as Vice-Chair of the SBI and Mr. Sidat Yaffa (Gambia) as Rapporteur.
	II.	Organizational matters
		(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
			(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
			3.	At its 1st meeting, on 1 December, the SBI considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBI/2015/11).
			4.	At the same meeting, the agenda was adopted as follows, with agenda sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance:
				1.	Opening of the session.
				2.	Organizational matters:
					(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
					(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
					(c)	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process;
					(d)	Election of officers other than the Chair.
					3.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention:
						(a)	Status of submission and review of sixth national communications and first biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
						(b)	Outcome of the first round of the international assessment and review process (2014–2015);
						(c)	Revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications”;
						(d)	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention for the period 1990–2013;
						(e)	Annual compilation and accounting report for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol for 2015.
				4.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention:
					(a)	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (agenda sub-item held in abeyance);
					(b)	Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(c)	Provision of financial and technical support;
					(d)	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention.
				5.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol:
					(a)	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism;
					(b)	Review of the joint implementation guidelines;
					(c)	Modalities for expediting the continued issuance, transfer and acquisition of joint implementation emission reduction units;
					(d)	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol.
				6.	Matters relating to the least developed countries.
				7.	National adaptation plans.
				8.	Report of the Adaptation Committee.
					9.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.
					10.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism:
						(a)	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network;
						(b)	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer.
				11.	Capacity-building:
					(a)	Capacity-building under the Convention;
					(b)	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol.
				12.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
					(a)	Forum and work programme;
					(b)	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol;
					(c)	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10.
				13.	The 2013–2015 review.
				14.	Gender and climate change.
				15.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters:
					(a)	Budget performance for the biennium 2014–2015;
					(b)	Audit report and financial statements for 2014.
					16.	Report on other activities: summary report on the 3rd Dialogue on Article 6 of the Convention.
				17.	Other matters.
				18.	Closure of and report on the session.
			5.	At the same meeting, statements were made by representatives of six Parties, including on behalf of the Group of 77 and China (G77 and China), the Umbrella Group, the African Group, the least developed countries (LDCs), the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) and the European Union (EU) and its 28 member States. Statements were also made by representatives of women and gender non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and environmental NGOs (ENGOs).
		B.	Organization of the work of the session
			(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			6.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, at which the Chair drew attention to the note containing information on the organization of the session posted on the SBI 43 web page. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to proceed on the basis of the programme of work outlined in the information note referred to above, and in line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices. In particular, the Chair informed the SBI that he would continue to apply firm time management measures in order to enhance the efficiency, timeliness and transparency of work.
		C.	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process
			(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			7.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided by the Chair on the organization of the third and last multilateral assessment (MA) working group session under the first round of the international assessment and review (IAR) process, to be convened on 1 December, immediately after the completion of the 1st meeting of the SBI.
			8.	A summary report on the MA of the two Parties assessed at this session is contained in the annex.
		D.	Election of officers other than the Chair
			(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
			9.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, as well as at its 2nd meeting, on 4 December. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled rule 27 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, whereby the SBI is expected to elect its Vice-Chair and Rapporteur.
			10.	At the 2nd meeting, the SBI elected Mr. Zhihua Chen (China) as Vice-Chair. The Chair informed Parties that nominations for the post of Rapporteur had not been received and that in accordance with rule 22, paragraph 2, of the draft rules of procedure being applied, Mr. Yaffa, the current Rapporteur, would remain in office until his replacement is elected at the next session of the SBI.
	III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda item 3)
		A.	Status of submission and review of sixth national communications and first biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(a))
			Proceedings
				11.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.9.
		B.	Outcome of the first round of the international assessment and review process (2014–2015) 
(Agenda sub-item 3(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				12.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Fatima Hussein (Kenya) and Ms. Helen Plume (New Zealand). At its 2nd meeting, it considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				13.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of the outcome of the first round of the IAR process at SBI 44 (May 2016).
		C.	Revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications”
(Agenda sub-item 3(c))
			1.	Proceedings
				14.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it document FCCC/TP/2015/3. At the 1st meeting, the Chair proposed preparing draft conclusions on this sub-item, in consultation with interested Parties. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				15.	The SBI continued its consideration, initiated at SBI 40, on the revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications” (hereinafter referred to as the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on NCs).
				16.	The SBI acknowledged with appreciation the revised and updated technical paper prepared by the secretariat on the revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on NCs. This paper reflects the provisions of the conclusions of SBI 42 and the views submitted by Parties.
				17.	The SBI requested the secretariat to organize a pre-sessional workshop prior to 
SBI 44 under the guidance of the Chair of the SBI to advance the discussions on the revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on NCs, using the technical paper referred to in paragraph 16 above as input.
				18.	The SBI also requested the secretariat to prepare a report on the workshop mentioned in paragraph 17 above to serve as input to the discussion on this matter at SBI 44.
				19.	The SBI agreed to continue its work on the revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on NCs at SBI 44 with a view to finalizing the revised guidelines and recommending them for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties (COP) at its twenty-second session (November 2016).
				20.	The SBI took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 17 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of supplementary financial resources.
		D.	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention for the period 1990–2013
(Agenda sub-item 3(d))
			Proceedings
				21.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2015/21. The representative of one Party made a statement.
		E.	Annual compilation and accounting report for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol for 2015
(Agenda sub-item 3(e))
			Proceedings
				22.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It recommended that the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) take note of the information contained in document FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/6 and Add.1/Rev.1.
	IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda item 4)
		A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
			(Agenda sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance)
		B.	Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
			(Agenda sub-item 4(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				23.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2015/17, FCCC/SBI/2015/18, FCCC/SBI/2015/20 and FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.13. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Plume and Ms. Anne Rasmussen (Samoa). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				24.	The SBI noted the progress reports of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (CGE).
				25.	The SBI welcomed the progress made by the CGE in continuing to implement its work programme for 2015, focusing on adaptation, including:
					(a)	Conduct of three regional training workshops on vulnerability and adaptation assessment, during which 114 experts from 79 Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties) were trained. The SBI expressed its gratitude to the Governments of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Paraguay and Morocco for hosting the workshops;
					(b)	Update of training materials on vulnerability and adaptation assessment developed by the CGE and tested during the above-mentioned regional training workshops;
					(c)	Conduct of the regional training workshop for the African region on the preparation of biennial update reports (BURs) held in Bonn, Germany, from 23 to 25 February 2015. A total of 48 national experts representing 43 non-Annex I Parties from the African region took part in this workshop;
					(d)	Organization and presentation of five web-based seminars, three on mitigation assessment and two on the preparation of national greenhouse gas inventories, in which a total of 171 participants took part. Webinars are a cost-effective and dynamic mode of communication that enable a large number of national experts to receive technical information and share their experiences with a large audience, thereby efficiently contributing to the CGE addressing the needs of non-Annex I Parties. The SBI noted with satisfaction this new format, which can reach a large audience of practitioners, and encouraged the CGE to continue this activity;
					(e)	Release of the CGE e-learning courses on the preparation of national communications from non-Annex I Parties, which are available through the secretariat’s Learning Management System. A total of 110 experts had registered for these courses as at 25 November 2015. The SBI encouraged the CGE to continue to update its online training courses;
					(f)	Ongoing development of an interactive online database on training materials aimed at supporting national reporting, which will allow for greater collaboration among national experts and enable them to share experiences and lessons learned in order to improve their national reports.
				26.	The SBI welcomed the launch of the training programme referred to in decision 20/CP.19, paragraph 4, to enhance the capacity of experts nominated to the UNFCCC roster of experts to conduct efficient and effective technical analysis of BURs, and noted with appreciation that 122 experts have successfully completed the training programme and are now eligible to become members of the team of technical experts that undertake the technical analysis of BURs. The SBI encouraged other experts on the UNFCCC roster of experts to undergo the training and encouraged Parties that have not yet done so to nominate experts.
				27.	The SBI noted the plan of the CGE to organize regional training workshops on the preparation of BURs in 2016, subject to the availability of financial resources.
				28.	The SBI urged developed country Parties included in Annex II to the Convention and other developed country Parties in a position to do so to provide financial resources to enable the CGE to implement the activities planned in accordance with its work programme for 2016–2018. The SBI also encouraged the CGE to prioritize elements of its 2015 work programme that have not yet been undertaken. It also invited multilateral programmes and organizations to collaborate with the CGE, as appropriate, in the provision of technical support to non-Annex I Parties in preparing their national communications and BURs.
				29.	The SBI took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the CGE, with the assistance of the secretariat, including the workshops referred to in paragraph 27 above.
				30.	The SBI requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
			C.	Provision of financial and technical support
				(Agenda sub-item 4(c))
				1.	Proceedings
					31.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.15 and FCCC/CP/2015/4. At the 1st meeting, the Chair proposed preparing draft conclusions on this sub-item, in consultation with interested Parties. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					32.	The SBI took note of the information provided by the secretariat of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) on the financial support provided by the GEF for the preparation of national communications and BURs by non-Annex I Parties.
					33.	The SBI invited the GEF to continue to provide detailed, accurate, timely and complete information on its activities relating to the preparation of national communications by non-Annex I Parties, including the dates of approvals of funding and disbursement of funds. It also invited the GEF to continue to provide an approximate date for completion of draft national communications and an approximate date for submission of final national communications to the secretariat, for consideration at SBI 45 (November 2016).
					34.	The SBI further invited the GEF to continue to provide detailed, accurate, timely and complete information on its activities relating to the preparation of BURs, including the dates of requests for funding, approvals of funding and disbursement of funds, and an approximate date for submission of BURs to the secretariat, for consideration at SBI 44.
					35.	The SBI noted that, as at 1 December 2015, 16 non-Annex I Parties had submitted their first BUR in accordance with decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 41(a), and that a further 16 non-Annex I Parties were expected to submit their first BUR by 31 December 2015. It further noted that, as at 1 December 2015, the GEF secretariat had received and processed a total of 86 requests from non-Annex I Parties for funds for the preparation of their first BUR, 38 of them being requests made after the GEF report was submitted to COP 20, and three requests from non-Annex I Parties for funds for the preparation of their second BUR.
					36.	The SBI noted that, as at 1 December 2015, there were many outstanding BURs, while recognizing the challenges that non-Annex I Parties face in submitting their BURs in a timely manner. It recalled decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 41(a), which states that non-Annex I Parties, consistent with their capabilities and the level of support provided for reporting, should submit their first BURs by December 2014. The SBI encouraged non-Annex I Parties that have not submitted their first BURs to complete and submit them in a timely manner.
					37.	Recalling decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 41(d), the SBI reiterated its urging of the non-Annex I Parties that have yet to submit, as applicable, their request to the GEF for support for the preparation of their first BUR to do so in a timely manner. In addition, the SBI encouraged the GEF agencies to continue to facilitate the preparation and submission of project proposals by non-Annex I Parties for the preparation of their BURs.
					38.	The SBI noted the information provided by the GEF in its report to COP 21 on the procedures available to facilitate access by non-Annex I Parties to funding for the preparation of their national communications and multiple BURs with one application.
					39.	The SBI also noted information provided by the GEF on its Global Support Programme (GSP) for national communications and BURs, and welcomed the activities carried out in 2015, through which technical assistance was provided to non-Annex I Parties. The SBI encouraged non-Annex I Parties to take advantage of the opportunities for technical assistance and support available under the GSP.
					40.	The SBI, recalling the request from non-Annex I Parties for further technical support aimed at improving their domestic capacity to facilitate continuity in meeting reporting requirements, urged developed country Parties included in Annex II to the Convention and other developed country Parties in a position to do so to provide financial resources to enable the secretariat to implement the relevant activities, planned from March 2016.
					41.	The SBI noted with appreciation that, as at 1 December 2015, 147 initial, 110 second, 13 third, 1 fourth and 1 fifth national communications from non-Annex I Parties had been submitted. It also noted that, by the end of 2015, 20 second and 11 third national communications from non-Annex I Parties were expected to be submitted.
			D.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
				(Agenda sub-item 4(d))
				Proceedings
					42.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the four summary reports made available so far on the UNFCCC website.
	V.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol
		(Agenda item 5)
		A.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism
			(Agenda sub-item 5(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				43.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Karolina Attonen (Finland) and Mr. Jeffery Spooner (Jamaica). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				44.	The SBI continued its consideration of possible changes to the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism (CDM).
				45.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of possible changes to the CDM modalities and procedures, taking into account the priorities of Parties with regard to this matter, at SBI 44.
		B.	Review of the joint implementation guidelines
			(Agenda sub-item 5(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				46.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Dimitar Nikov (France) and Mr. Yaw Osafo (Ghana). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				47.	The SBI continued its consideration of the review of the guidelines for the implementation of Article 6 of the Kyoto Protocol (the joint implementation guidelines) in accordance with decision 6/CMP.8, paragraphs 14–16.
				48.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 44 on the basis of the draft decision text proposed by the co-facilitators of the informal consultations on this agenda sub-item contained in the annex to document FCCC/SBI/2015/L.30.
		C.	Modalities for expediting the continued issuance, transfer and acquisition of joint implementation emission reduction units
			(Agenda sub-item 5(c))
			1.	Proceedings
				49.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At the 1st meeting, the Chair proposed preparing draft conclusions on this sub-item, in consultation with interested Parties. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				50.	The SBI continued its consideration of modalities for expediting the continued issuance, transfer and acquisition of joint implementation emission reduction units, in accordance with decision 1/CMP.8, paragraph 16.
				51.	The SBI completed its consideration of this matter.
		D.	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol
			(Agenda sub-item 5(d))
			Proceedings
				52.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of document FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.12.
	VI.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
		(Agenda item 6)
		1.	Proceedings
			53.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2015/19 and Corr.1 and FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.14. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Mr. Batu Krishna Uprety (Nepal), Chair of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG), to report on the group’s activities. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations facilitated by Mr. Mamadou Honadia (Burkina Faso). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			54.	The SBI took note of the oral report of the Chair of the LEG on the implementation of the LEG work programme for 2014–2015 and expressed its appreciation to the LEG for progress made under this work programme.
			55.	The SBI welcomed the report on the 28th meeting of the LEG, held in Antananarivo, Madagascar, from 12 to 16 September 2015, the information paper on the NAP Expo and the regional training workshops on national adaptation plans (NAPs), the publications produced by the LEG under the work programme referred to in paragraph 54 above and the progress made in relation to NAP Central.
			56.	The SBI expressed its sincere appreciation to the LEG for the valuable guidance and support that the LEG has provided to the LDCs.
			57.	In addition, it expressed its gratitude to the following:
				(a)	The Government of Egypt, for hosting the regional training workshop on NAPs for Northern and Western African anglophone LDCs, held in Cairo, Egypt, from 27 to 31 July 2015;
				(b)	The Government of Myanmar, for hosting the regional training workshop on NAPs for the Asian region, held in Yangon, Myanmar, from 10 to 14 August 2015;
				(c)	The Government of Madagascar, for hosting the regional training workshop on NAPs for African lusophone LDCs and island States, held in Antananarivo from 7 to 11 September 2015, and the 28th meeting of the LEG, referred to in paragraph 55 above;
				(d)	The Government of Niger, for hosting the regional training workshop on NAPs for francophone LDCs, held in Niamey, Niger, from 28 September to 2 October 2015.
			58.	The SBI acknowledged the benefits to LDC Parties arising from holding meetings and regional events of the LEG in the LDCs and encouraged the LEG to continue this practice.
			59.	It expressed its gratitude to the Government of Ireland for financially supporting the work of the LEG.
			60.	The SBI welcomed the active engagement of the LDCs in the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
			61.	The SBI noted that 32 project proposals for the implementation of national adaptation programmes of action (NAPAs) and for the process to formulate NAPs, accounting for a total of USD 235.7 million, had been technically cleared by the GEF, but, as at 30 June 2015, were awaiting funding under the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF).
			62.	The SBI noted with appreciation the new pledges made by Parties to the LDCF and invited other Parties in a position to do so to contribute to the Fund, recognizing the importance of supporting the full implementation of NAPAs in addressing urgent and immediate adaptation needs, building capacity for medium- and long-term adaptation planning and implementation, and successfully undertaking the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
			63.	The SBI also noted with appreciation the continued active engagement and collaboration of the LEG with the Adaptation Committee and other constituted bodies under the Convention, the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change and a wide range of relevant organizations, agencies and regional centres. It requested the LEG to continue to enhance this engagement.
	VII.	National adaptation plans
		(Agenda item 7)
		1.	Proceedings
			64.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2015/19 and Corr.1, FCCC/CP/2015/4, FCCC/CP/2015/3, FCCC/SB/2015/2, FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.11 and FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.14. The representative of one Party made a statement. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Jens Fugl (EU) and Mr. Honadia. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			65.	The SBI took note of the information contained in the documents referred to in paragraph 64 above.
			66.	The SBI recommended a draft decision on NAPs for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
	VIII.	Report of the Adaptation Committee
		(Agenda item 8)
		Proceedings
			67.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it document FCCC/SB/2015/2. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Mr. Juan Hoffmaister (Plurinational State of Bolivia), Co-Chair of the Adaptation Committee, to report on the Committee’s activities. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item together with agenda item 4 of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Anton Hilber (Switzerland) and Ms. Malia Talakai (Nauru).
			68.	At its 2nd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
	IX.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
		(Agenda item 9)
		Proceedings
			69.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2015/3. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Ms. Pepetua Latasi (Tuvalu), Co-Chair of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts, to report on the Committee’s activities. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item together with SBSTA agenda item 7 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago) and Ms. Beth Lavender (Canada).
			70.	At its 2nd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
	X.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism
		(Agenda item 10)
		A.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network
			(Agenda sub-item 10(a))
			Proceedings
				71.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/SB/2015/1 and FCCC/SB/2015/INF.3. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with SBSTA agenda item 5 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize) and Ms. Elfriede More (Austria).
				72.	At its 2nd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
		B.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer
			(Agenda sub-item 10(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				73.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2015/16, FCCC/SB/2015/1 and FCCC/CP/2015/4 and Add.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations facilitated by Mr. Fuller and Ms. More. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				74.	The SBI welcomed the report of the GEF on the progress made in carrying out the Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer (PSP), and the information contained in that report on its ongoing collaboration with the Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN).
				75.	The SBI also welcomed the final report of the Technology Executive Committee (TEC) on the evaluation of the PSP, undertaken with the aim of enhancing the effectiveness of the Technology Mechanism.
				76.	The SBI invited the TEC and the Advisory Board of the CTCN to take into consideration the experiences gained and lessons learned that were identified in the evaluation report referred to in paragraph 75 above when preparing their future workplans.
				77.	The SBI also invited Parties, the CTCN and other relevant entities working on technology development and transfer to act upon the recommendations contained in the report referred to in paragraph 75 above and encouraged the GEF and other relevant financial entities to consider them.
				78.	The SBI also encouraged the GEF to share the midterm evaluations of the PSP climate technology transfer and finance centres and pilot projects of the fourth replenishment of the GEF with the TEC and the CTCN as soon as available.
				79.	The SBI invited the TEC to update the evaluation report, drawing upon the experiences gained and lessons learned from the activities referred to in paragraph 78 above, with the aim of enhancing the effectiveness of the Technology Mechanism, for consideration by the COP no later than at its twenty-third session (November 2017), through the SBI.
	XI.	Capacity-building
		(Agenda item 11)
		A.	Capacity-building under the Convention
			(Agenda sub-item 11(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				80.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2015/14 and FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.16. Representatives of nine Parties made statements, including on behalf of the EU. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Bubu Jallow (Gambia) and Mr. Kunihiko Shimada (Japan). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				81.	The SBI could not conclude its consideration of this agenda sub-item. It recommended that COP 21 continue consideration of this matter on the basis on the draft decision text contained in the annex to document FCCC/SBI/2015/L.33.
		B.	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol
			(Agenda sub-item 11(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				82.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2015/14 and FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.16. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Jallow and Mr. Shimada. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				83.	The SBI could not conclude its consideration of this agenda sub-item. It recommended that CMP 11 continue consideration of this matter on the basis on the draft decision text contained in the annex to document FCCC/SBI/2015/L.34.
	XII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
		(Agenda item 12)
		A.	Forum and work programme
			(Agenda sub-item 12(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				84.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with agenda sub-item 9(a) of the SBSTA in a contact group co-chaired by the Chair of the SBSTA, Ms. Lidia Wojtal, and the Chair of the SBI. The SBI also agreed to consider this agenda sub-item at this session jointly with SBI agenda sub-items 12(b) and (c). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				85.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the submissions from Parties on the further elaboration of the work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures and the modalities for its implementation.
				86.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the draft decision text contained in the annex to document FCCC/SB/2015/L.2 on the forum and work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures along with the submissions from Parties, as referred to in paragraph 85 above.
				87.	The SBI and the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on this matter for further consideration and adoption at COP 21.
		B.	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol
			(Agenda sub-item 12(b))
			Proceedings
				88.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item jointly with SBI agenda sub-item 12(a) and SBSTA agenda sub-item 9(a). At the same meeting, the SBI also agreed that the Chair of the SBI would undertake consultations with interested Parties on how to take up this agenda sub-item at SBI 44. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration at SBI 44 of how to take up this agenda sub-item.
		C.	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10
			(Agenda sub-item 12(c))
			Proceedings
				89.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item jointly with SBI agenda sub-item 12(a) and SBSTA agenda sub-item 9(a). At the same meeting, the SBI also agreed that the Chair of the SBI would undertake consultations with interested Parties on how to take up this agenda sub-item at SBI 44. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration at SBI 44 of how to take up this agenda sub-item.
	XIII.	The 2013–2015 review
		(Agenda item 13)
		Proceedings
			90.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. Representatives of three Parties made statements, including one on behalf of the EU and one on behalf of AOSIS. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item jointly with SBSTA agenda sub-item 8(b) in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Gertraud Wollansky (Austria) and Mr. Leon Charles (Grenada). At the 2nd meeting, the SBI Chair informed Parties that the SBSTA and the SBI could not conclude their considerations and findings on the 2013–2015 review, and that the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies would seek further guidance from the COP President in accordance with decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 166.
	XIV.	Gender and climate change
		(Agenda item 14)
		1.	Proceedings
			91.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/CP/2015/6 and FCCC/SBI/2015/12. At the 1st meeting, the Chair proposed preparing draft conclusions on this agenda item, in consultation with interested Parties. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			92.	The SBI took note of the report by the secretariat on the gender composition of constituted bodies established under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol and Party delegations attending sessions under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol. It noted with concern that, since the last report, only one constituted body has seen an increase in the representation of women, which remains between 6 and 35 per cent in the majority of constituted bodies.
			93.	The SBI recalled that by decision 23/CP.18, Parties agreed to review progress made towards the goal of gender balance at COP 22. It urged Parties to enhance their efforts during COP 21 and CMP 11 to identify qualified women and nominate them to bodies established under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol and to continue to strive for gender balance in their delegations in order to improve women’s participation and inform a more effective climate change policy that addresses the needs of women and men equally.
			94.	The SBI welcomed the report by the secretariat on the in-session workshop on gender-responsive climate policy with a focus on mitigation action and technology development and transfer, which was held during the forty-second sessions of the subsidiary bodies. It noted with appreciation the submissions from Parties, admitted observer organizations and other stakeholders as input to the workshop.
			95.	Taking into account matters referred to in the workshop report, the SBI invited the secretariat, inter alia:
				(a)	To include information on relevant tools and methods to assess the environmental, social and economic benefits of involving men and women equally in climate change related activities when preparing the technical paper on guidelines or other tools on integrating gender considerations into climate change related activities under the Convention in accordance with decision 18/CP.20, paragraph 14;
				(b)	In cooperation with relevant organizations:
					(i)	To capture and make publicly available good practice examples of gender-responsive mitigation and technology development and transfer policies and programmes;
					(ii)	To explore further ways and means to integrate gender-responsiveness into technology needs assessments in order to enhance their implementation.
			96.	The SBI encouraged Parties to use the information contained in the report referred to in paragraph 92 above to inform, support and strengthen the implementation of gender-responsive climate policy in the areas of mitigation action and technology development and transfer.
			97.	The SBI, recalling decision 18/CP.20, noted with appreciation the efforts of Parties and relevant organizations to support the implementation of that decision, particularly in relation to organizing training and awareness-raising activities on issues related to gender and climate change, and their efforts to strengthen existing work in the thematic areas of adaptation, mitigation, finance, technology and capacity-building so as to incorporate appropriate gender-sensitive and gender-responsive approaches into that work. It encouraged interested Parties, relevant organizations and the secretariat to continue such efforts pursuant to that decision.
			98.	The SBI encouraged Parties and admitted observer organizations to submit, by 3 February 2016, their views on the matters to be addressed at the in-session workshop on gender-responsive climate policy with a focus on adaptation and capacity-building and training for delegates on gender issues, to be held during SBI 44 in accordance with decision 18/CP.20.
			99.	The SBI took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 95 above.
			100.	The SBI requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
			101.	The SBI invited Parties and relevant organizations to provide the means for implementing the work referred to in paragraph 95 above.
	XV.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
		(Agenda item 15)
		A.	Budget performance for the biennium 2014–2015
			(Agenda sub-item 15(a))
			Proceedings
				102.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2015/13 and FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.17. The Executive Secretary made a statement. At the 1st meeting, the Chair proposed preparing draft conclusions on this sub-item, in consultation with interested Parties.
				103.	At its 2nd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 21 and a draft decision for consideration and adoption at CMP 11.,
		B.	Audit report and financial statements for 2014
			(Agenda sub-item 15(b))
			Proceedings
				104.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of document FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.10.
				105.	At its 2nd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 21 and a draft decision for consideration and adoption at cop 11.,
	XVI.	Report on other activities: summary report on the 
3rd Dialogue on Article 6 of the Convention
		(Agenda item 16)
		Proceedings
			106.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2015/15 and noted that the implementation of Article 6 of the Convention is now referred to as “Action for Climate Empowerment”.
	XVII.	Other matters
		(Agenda item 17)
		Proceedings
			107.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. No other matters were raised by Parties.
	XVIII.	Closure of and report on the session
		(Agenda item 18)
		1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
			108.	At the 2nd meeting, a representative of the secretariat provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during the session in accordance with the provisions of rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
			109.	The secretariat informed Parties that a number of activities had arisen from the negotiations at the session that called for more support by the secretariat and, therefore, required additional resources over and above the core budget for the proposed budget for 2016–2017, as detailed below.
			110.	Under agenda item 8, funding in the amount of EUR 1.95 million will be required in the biennium 2016–2017 to cover the cost of supporting the implementation of the workplan of the Adaptation Committee. For Parties’ information, these are the same funds as those required under SBSTA agenda item 4.
			111.	Under agenda item 14, funding in the amount of EUR 90,000 will be required for specific work to be undertaken by the secretariat in cooperation with relevant organizations.
			112.	The above-mentioned amounts are preliminary and based on the information available at the time of publication of this report. Overall, additional funds amounting to EUR 2.05 million will be needed to cover additional activities in the biennium 2016–2017.
			113.	The secretariat also noted that some of the conclusions adopted by the SBI and decisions proposed by it and adopted at this session will have budgetary implications beyond 2017. The resource requirements for the biennium 2018–2019 will be reviewed in the context of established budgetary procedures.
		2.	Closure of and report on the session
			114.	At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session and to make it available to all Parties.
			115.	Closing statements were made by representatives of six Parties, including on behalf of the G77 and China, the African Group, AOSIS, the Umbrella Group, the LDCs and the EU. Statements were also made by representatives of youth NGOs and ENGOs. The Chair thanked Parties for their support and closed the session.
			1.	
Annex
	[English only]
	Summary reports on multilateral assessments at the forty-third session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation
		Background
			
				1.	The Conference of the Parties, by decision 1/CP.16, decided that developed country Parties should enhance the reporting in their national communications and submit biennial reports on their progress in achieving emission reductions. It also established a new process under the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) – international assessment and review (IAR) – that aims to promote the comparability of efforts among all developed country Parties. The first round of the IAR process is to be conducted during the period 2014–2015.
				2.	According to the modalities and procedures for IAR specified in annex II to decision 2/CP.17, the multilateral assessment (MA), being part of the IAR process, is to be conducted for each developed country Party at a working group session of the SBI, with the participation of all Parties. The aim of the MA is to assess each Party’s progress in implementation towards the achievement of emission reductions and removals related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction target.
				3.	The third MA working group session was convened during SBI 43 under the chairmanship of Mr. Amena Yauvoli (Fiji), the SBI Chair, and was preceded by a three-month period of questions and answers; in the first month, any Party may submit written questions to the Party being assessed, which may respond to the questions within the remaining two months. A summary report for each of the two Parties that were assessed at SBI 43 is presented below. The reports are also available on the UNFCCC website on the individual Party pages.
				4.	In closing the MA for each Party, the SBI Chair reminded the Party that it can submit any other observations on its MA process within two months of the working group session, and that they will form part of its Party record for the MA. The SBI Chair thanked all Parties and the secretariat for the successful MA working group session, which completed the first IAR round.
				
			
	Summary report on the multilateral assessment of Belarus
		1.	The first MA of Belarus took place at a working group session during SBI 43, on 1 December 2015. Belarus was represented by Ms. Irina Rudzko, Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Protection.
		2.	Questions for Belarus had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by the following delegations: Brazil, China, European Union, New Zealand, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Belarus can be found on the IAR web page for Belarus.
		3.	Ms. Rudzko made an opening presentation, summarizing Belarus’s progress in implementation towards the achievement of emission reductions and removals related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction target. Belarus has been a Party to the Convention since 2000, and has committed to an 8 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2020 compared with the 1990 level. Between 1990 and 2012, emissions decreased by 35.8 per cent, mainly in the energy sector in the early 1990s as a consequence of the economic recession in the country, and the subsequent decrease in production and fuel consumption. Between 1995 and 2012, emissions increased by 0.5 per cent annually on average; however, this increase was much smaller than that of gross domestic product (GDP) (7.9 per cent average annual growth). These trends indicate a decoupling of GHG emissions and GDP after the economic recession of the early 1990s.
		4.	The key policies and measures to achieve the target are the Renewable Energy Law, enforced in 2010, the Presidential Decree on Renewable Energy Sources of 2015 and the Energy Saving Law, which was enforced in 2015. Although Belarus acknowledged that there is still a high mitigation potential in the country, it also emphasized certain barriers for additional measures, including limited foreign investments, uncertainties regarding additional financial resources, and other priorities such as safeguarding national food and energy supplies.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from the following delegations: Australia, Canada, China, European Union, Japan and New Zealand. The questions were on: the main sources of GHG emissions in Belarus; the share of the different renewable energy sources (RES) in the energy mix, their projected share by 2020 and strategies to expand the use of RES; the key mitigation actions to meet the target and their expected impacts; the inclusion of land use, land-use change and forestry in the target; and conversion to GHG emissions based on the use of the global warming potentials from the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. In response, Belarus provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Belarus.
		
		
		
		
		Summary report on the multilateral assessment of Kazakhstan
			1.	The first MA of Kazakhstan took place at a working group session during SBI 43, on 1 December 2015. Kazakhstan was represented by Ms. Gulmira Sergazina, Ministry of Energy.
			2.	Questions for Kazakhstan had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by the following delegations: Brazil, China, European Union, New Zealand, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Kazakhstan can be found on the IAR web page for Kazakhstan.
			3.	Ms. Sergazina made an opening presentation, summarizing Kazakhstan’s progress in implementation towards the achievement of emission reductions and removals related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction target. The presentation also summarized the country’s economic profile and its GHG emission trends and contributing sectors. The GHG emissions in the country declined by 57.2 per cent from 1990 to 1999 and since then have been growing, mostly owing to economic development. About 80 per cent of the GHG emissions are attributed to the energy sector.
			4.	Measures taken to reach the economy-wide target of a 30 per cent reduction in GHG emissions by 2020 compared with the 1990 level include legislative instruments and financial mechanisms and incentives, such as the laws on energy saving, on energy efficiency and on feed-in tariffs for RES. As described in strategic policy documents, such as those for the green economy concept and the Kazakhstan 2050 strategy, by 2020 Kazakhstan intends to: reduce its energy intensity per GDP by 25 per cent; reduce its carbon dioxide emissions from electricity production to the level of 2012; and increase the share of renewable energy in its total primary energy supply to 3 per cent through the installation of wind and solar power.
			5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from the following delegations: Australia, Canada, China, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Sweden and the United States of America. The questions were on: the GHG projections; progress towards reaching the target; the development of a national emissions trading system; plans to implement carbon storage technologies; the increase of energy efficiency in the energy supply; the potential of hydro, wind and solar energy; policies and measures to promote renewable energy; the scope of the green economy concept; and measures to reduce the carbon intensity of the GDP. In response, Kazakhstan provided further explanations. Furthermore, a written answer was provided by Kazakhstan after the MA session in response to the question of the United States during the session regarding the difference in projections reported in the third to sixth national communications and the first biennial report. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Kazakhstan.
			
			
	
