Subsidiary Body for Implementation
	|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBI/2017/7 |
	|  |  | Distr.: General 30 June 2017  Original: English |
	
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its forty-sixth session, held in Bonn from 8 to 18 May 2017
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session
		(Agenda item 1)		1–2	4
		II.	Organizational matters
		(Agenda item 2)		3–11	4
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		3–5	4
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		6–7	6
			C.	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international
assessment and review process 		8	6
			D.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation
 and analysis process		9–10	6
		E.	Other mandated events		11	7
		III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda item 3)		12–19	7
			A.	Status of submission and review of second biennial reports from
Parties included in Annex I to the Convention 		12	7
			B.	Compilation and synthesis of second biennial reports from Parties
included in Annex I to the Convention		13	7
			C.	Revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national 
communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention,
Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications”		14	8
			D.	Revision of the modalities and procedures for international 
assessment and review 		15–19	8
		IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda item 4)		20–21	8
			A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties
not included in Annex I to the Convention			9
		B.	Provision of financial and technical support		20	9
			C.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports
of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention		21	9
			V.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a
public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 5)		22–28	9
			VI.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a
public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 6)		29–36	10
		VII.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism
		(Agenda item 7)		37	11
		VIII.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
		(Agenda item 8)		38–55	11
		IX.	National adaptation plans
		(Agenda item 9)		56	13
			X.	Development and transfer of technologies: scope and modalities for the periodic
assessment of the Technology Mechanism in relation to supporting the implementation
of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 10)		57–61	13
			XI.	Matters relating to climate finance
(Agenda item 11)		62–76	14
		A.	Review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance		62–69	14
		B.	Third review of the Adaptation Fund		70–76	15
			XII.	Matters relating to capacity-building
(Agenda item 12)		77–78	16
		A.	Capacity-building under the Convention		77	16
		B.	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol		78	17
			XIII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
(Agenda item 13)		79–92	17
		A.	Improved forum and work programme		79–84	17
			B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement
of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures		85–91	18
		C.	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol			19
		D.	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10		92	19
			XIV.	Scope of the next periodic review of the long-term global goal under the
Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it
(Agenda item 14)		93–99	19
		XV.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings
		(Agenda item 15)		100–121	20
		XVI.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
		(Agenda item 16)		122–143	23
		A.	Programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019			23
		B.	Other financial and budgetary matters 		122–133	23
		C.	Continuing review of functions and operations of the secretariat 		134–138	24
		D.	Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement 		139–143	25
		XVII.	Other matters
		(Agenda item 17)		144	26
		XVIII.	Closure of and report on the session
		(Agenda item 18)		145–151	26
		
Addendum – FCCC/SBI/2017/7/Add.1
Draft decisions forwarded for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties 
serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol
	Draft decision -/CP.23. Scope of the next periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it
	Draft decision -/CP.23. Programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019
	Draft decision -/CMP.13. Programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019
	Draft decision -/CMP.13. Budget for the international transaction log and a methodology for the collection of its fees for the biennium 2018–2019
	
Addendum – FCCC/SBI/2017/7/Add.2
	Summary reports on multilateral assessments at the forty-sixth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation
	
	I.	Opening of the session
		(Agenda item 1)
			1.	The forty-sixth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) was held at the World Conference Center Bonn in Bonn, Germany, from 8 to 18 May 2017.
			2.	The Chair of the SBI, Mr. Tomasz Chruszczow (Poland), opened the session on Monday, 8 May, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Mr. Zhihua Chen (China) as Vice-Chair of the SBI and Ms. Tugba Icmeli (Turkey) as Rapporteur.
	II.	Organizational matters
		(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
			(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
				3.	At its 1st meeting, on 8 May, the SBI considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBI/2017/1). Representatives of three Parties made statements.
				4.	At the same meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBI adopted the agenda amended as follows, with sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance:
					1.	Opening of the session.
					2.	Organizational matters:
						(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
						(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
						(c)	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process;
						(d)	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process;
						(e)	Other mandated events.
					3.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention:
						(a)	Status of submission and review of second biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
						(b)	Compilation and synthesis of second biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
						(c)	Revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications”;
						(d)	Revision of the modalities and procedures for international assessment and review.
					4.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention:
						(a)	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (agenda sub-item held in abeyance);
						(b)	Provision of financial and technical support;
						(c)	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention.
					5.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
					6.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
					7.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism.
					8.	Matters relating to the least developed countries.
					9.	National adaptation plans.
					10.	Development and transfer of technologies: scope and modalities for the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism in relation to supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement.
					11.	Matters relating to climate finance:
						(a)	Review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance;
						(b)	Third review of the Adaptation Fund.
					12.	Matters relating to capacity-building:
						(a)	Capacity-building under the Convention;
						(b)	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol.
					13.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
						(a)	Improved forum and work programme;
						(b)	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures;
						(c)	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol;
						(d)	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10.
					14.	Scope of the next periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it.
				15.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings.
				16.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters:
					(a)	Programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019;
					(b)	Other financial and budgetary matters;
					(c)	Continuing review of functions and operations of the secretariat;
					(d)	Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement.
				17.	Other matters.
				18.	Closure of and report on the session.
					5.	At the resumed 1st meeting, on 8 May, two statements were made by representatives of two Parties on behalf of, respectively, the Group of 77 and China (G77 and China) and the Umbrella Group. At the 2nd meeting, on 9 May, statements were made by representatives of eight Parties on behalf of, respectively, the European Union and its member States, the Environmental Integrity Group, the African Group, the least developed countries (LDCs), the Alliance of Small Island States, the Arab Group, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty and the Coalition for Rainforest Nations. Statements were also made by a representative of the World Meteorological Organization and by representatives of women and gender non-governmental organizations (NGOs), youth NGOs, environmental NGOs, farmers NGOs, indigenous peoples organizations, and local government and municipal authorities.,
		B.	Organization of the work of the session
			(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
				6.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, at which the Chair drew attention to the deadline for concluding the work of all groups by 1 p.m. on Wednesday, 17 May, to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to proceed on this basis and in line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
				7.	On 13 May, the SBI convened an informal plenary jointly with the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) and the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Paris Agreement (APA) to consider linkages in the work of the subsidiary bodies on the implementation of the work programme under the Paris Agreement. At this meeting, the presiding officers of the subsidiary bodies made presentations on the Paris Agreement related items on the agendas of their respective bodies.
		C.	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			8.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided by the Chair on the organization of the second multilateral assessment working group session under the second round of the international assessment and review (IAR) process, which was to be convened on 12 and 13 May. A summary report on the multilateral assessment of the 17 Parties assessed at this session is contained in document FCCC/SBI/2017/7/Add.2.
		D.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process
			(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
				9.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided by the Chair on the organization of the workshop of the facilitative sharing of views (FSV) under the international consultation and analysis (ICA) process, which was to take place on 15 May.
				10.	The Chair drew attention to the ICA modalities and guidelines as well as the FSV web pages. He informed the SBI that the output of the ICA process will include, for each of the 10 Parties participating in this FSV workshop, a record of the proceedings of the FSV session and a summary report as the outcome of the technical analysis of the Party’s biennial update report.
		E.	Other mandated events
			(Agenda sub-item 2(e))
				11.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided on the other mandated events being organized at this session, highlighting the technical expert meetings on mitigation and adaptation, which form the core of the technical examination processes, the first meeting of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building and the in-session workshop to develop possible elements of a gender action plan.
	III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda item 3)
		A.	Status of submission and review of second biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(a))
			12.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.1.
		B.	Compilation and synthesis of second biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(b))
			13.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting, on 18 May. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Mr. Stephen King’uyu (Kenya) and Ms. Helen Plume (New Zealand). At the 3rd meeting, the Chair reported that the consultations did not result in any conclusions. In accordance with rules 10(c) and 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, this matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBI 47 (November 2017).
		C.	Revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, 
Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications”
(Agenda sub-item 3(c))
			14.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. A representative of one Party made a statement. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the Chair consult with interested Parties on this matter and report back at the closing plenary. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 50 (June 2019).
		D.	Revision of the modalities and procedures for international assessment and review
(Agenda sub-item 3(d))
			1.	Proceedings
				15.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. It had before it the submissions related to this agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Mr. King’uyu and Ms. Plume. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				16.	The SBI initiated its work, as mandated in decision 18/CP.22, paragraph 3, on the revision of the modalities and procedures for IAR on the basis of experience in the first round of IAR, taking into account submissions from Parties.
				17.	The SBI welcomed the first and second rounds of IAR, which were organized in line with the adopted modalities and procedures contained in annex II to decision 2/CP.17, and recognized the value of experience gained therefrom. It took note of the submissions from Parties and the exchange of views on the revision of the modalities and procedures for IAR.
				18.	The SBI also took note of the ongoing work of the APA under its agenda item on modalities, procedures and guidelines for the transparency framework for action and support referred to in Article 13 of the Paris Agreement. The SBI recognized that IAR, as part of the transparency arrangements under the Convention, forms part of the experience drawn upon for the development of those modalities, procedures and guidelines, in accordance with Article 13, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
				19.	The SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 50.
	IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda item 4)
		A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
			(Agenda sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance)
		B.	Provision of financial and technical support
			(Agenda sub-item 4(b))
				20.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. A representative of the secretariat introduced this agenda sub-item at the 1st meeting. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. King’uyu and Ms. Plume. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 47. At the same meeting, one Party, speaking on behalf of G77 and China and supported by a number of Parties, raised concerns relating to accessing financial support. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed that this would be recorded in the report.
		C.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
			(Agenda sub-item 4(c))
				21.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting. It took note of the summary reports made available so far on the UNFCCC website in the period from 1 October 2016 to 10 March 2017.
	V.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
		(Agenda item 5)
		1.	Proceedings
			22.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Madeleine Diouf Sarr (Senegal) and Ms. Gertraud Wollansky (Austria). At its 3rd meeting, it considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			23.	The SBI continued its deliberations in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 29, referring to Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
			24.	The SBI took note of the views exchanged by Parties at the session on the modalities and procedures for the operation and use of the public registry referred to in decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 29 (hereinafter referred to as the public registry mentioned in paragraph 23 above), including on the linkages of its work under this agenda item to its work under agenda item 6, “Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement”.
			25.	The SBI took note of the information provided by the secretariat at this session about the current operation of the interim registry for the nationally determined contributions and the views expressed by Parties at this session in relation to the public registry mentioned in paragraph 23 above, including allowing only the national focal points of Parties to upload nationally determined contributions, ensuring the security of accounts and the accessibility to what is in the public registry mentioned in paragraph 23 above, maintaining nationally determined contributions previously communicated by Parties, and providing a user guide for Parties and continuous support in operating the public registry mentioned in paragraph 23 above.
			26.	The SBI agreed that the modalities and procedures for the operation and use of the public registry mentioned in paragraph 23 above should be developed on the basis of the aspects referred to in paragraph 25 above.
			27.	The SBI invited Parties and observers to submit, by 21 September 2017, their views on the following issues relating to the modalities and procedures for the operation and use of the public registry mentioned in paragraph 23 above:
				(a)	Experience and lessons learned in using the interim registry for the nationally determined contributions relevant to developing the public registry mentioned in paragraph 23 above;
				(b)	The functions of the public registry mentioned in paragraph 23 above;
				(c)	The structure and design elements of the public registry mentioned in paragraph 23 above;
				(d)	Possible ways to enhance the security, accessibility and user-friendliness of, and support in, using the public registry mentioned in paragraph 23 above;
				(e)	Possible linkages as referred to in paragraph 24 above.
			28.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 47, including noting views expressed by Parties in their submissions.
	VI.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
		(Agenda item 6)
		1.	Proceedings
			29.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Diouf Sarr and Ms. Wollansky. At its 3rd meeting, it considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			30.	The SBI continued its consideration of a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
			31.	The SBI took note of the views exchanged by Parties at this session on the modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry mentioned in paragraph 30 above, including on the linkages of its work under this agenda item to its work under agenda item 5, “Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement”, and the web page maintained by the secretariat on undertakings in adaptation planning.
			32.	The SBI also took note of the views expressed by Parties on the technical design and functionality of a public registry mentioned in paragraph 30 above, including on the simplicity and user-friendliness, the security of accounts, accessibility of adaptation communications and the support necessary for the development of a public registry mentioned in paragraph 30 above.
			33.	The SBI agreed that the views expressed by Parties on the design aspects mentioned in paragraph 32 above should be considered when developing the modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry mentioned in paragraph 30 above.
			34.	The SBI took note of the views expressed by Parties on the technical design of a public registry mentioned in paragraph 30 above, and how the different vehicles for submitting the adaptation communication defined in Article 7, paragraph 11, of the Paris Agreement could be accommodated in the design.
			35.	The SBI invited Parties and observers to submit, by 21 September 2017, their views on the modalities and procedures of a public registry mentioned in paragraph 30 above, including on possible linkages as referred to in paragraph 31 above.
			36.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 47.
	VII.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism
		(Agenda item 7)
			37.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Karoliina Anttonen (Finland) and Mr. Yaw Osafo (Ghana). At the 3rd meeting, the Chair reported that the consultations did not result in any conclusions. In accordance with rules 10(c) and 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, this matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBI 47.
	VIII.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
		(Agenda item 8)
		1.	Proceedings
			38.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2017/6. A representative of one Party made a statement. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Mr Aderito Santana (Sao Tome and Principe), a member of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG), to report on the group’s activities. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Jens Fugl (Denmark) and Ms. Pepetua Latasi (Tuvalu). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			39.	The SBI welcomed the report on the 31st meeting of the LEG, held in Bonn from 7 to 10 March 2017.
			40.	The SBI expressed its gratitude to the Government of Malawi for hosting the regional training workshop on national adaptation plans (NAPs) for anglophone African developing countries, held in Lilongwe, Malawi, from 27 February to 3 March 2017.
			41.	The SBI invited Parties and relevant organizations to continue to provide resources in support of the implementation of the LEG work programme.
			42.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to the LEG and the secretariat for their work on supporting the LDCs. It welcomed the two-year rolling work programme of the LEG for 2017–2018, and encouraged the LEG to prioritize its work taking into account the availability of resources.
			43.	The SBI reiterated the value of holding NAP Expos as a means of effective, consistent and continuous sharing of information and lessons learned, as a platform for connecting countries to providers of services and support for their adaptation efforts and as a way to maintain the profile of NAPs and adaptation. It noted with concern the postponement of the NAP Expo that was planned to take place from 11 to 13 April 2017 in Bonn.
			44.	The SBI noted with appreciation the new pledges to the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) of USD 17.1 million, made between November 2016 and April 2017.
			45.	The SBI noted that, as at 9 May 2017, total LDCF funding approved during the Global Environment Facility (GEF) fiscal year 2017 amounted to USD 154.6 million, and that cumulative funding approvals since the establishment of the LDCF were USD 1.22 billion.
			46.	The SBI also noted that, as at 9 May 2017, 23 project proposals for the implementation of national adaptation programmes of action submitted by the LDCs, accounting for a total of USD 146.1 million, had been technically cleared by the GEF secretariat and were awaiting allocation of resources from the LDCF.
			47.	The SBI urged additional contributions to the LDCF.
			48.	The SBI welcomed the efforts of the LEG in providing technical guidance and advice on integrating NAPs with Sustainable Development Goals. It also welcomed the continuation of that work within the current two-year rolling work programme of the LEG.
			49.	The SBI further welcomed the technical guidance and advice provided by the LEG to the LDCs on the process to formulate and implement NAPs, including through regional training workshops and Open NAP case studies.
			50.	The SBI noted with appreciation the efforts of the LEG on providing technical guidance and advice to the LDCs on accessing funding from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) for the formulation of NAPs and on the subsequent implementation of the policies, projects and programmes identified by the LDCs, including the successful collaboration with the GCF secretariat on the same.
			51.	The SBI acknowledged that two proposals for the formulation of NAPs had already been approved by the GCF secretariat as at 9 December 2016 and that 16 proposals from developing countries were in the pipeline either for submission or approval by the GCF secretariat.
			52.	The SBI invited the LEG to include, as appropriate, an item on access to the GCF readiness and preparatory support programme on the agendas for regional training workshops on NAPs and for NAP Expos.
			53.	The SBI invited Parties and relevant organizations to submit, by 2 February 2018, suggestions for consideration by the LEG in its response to the invitation from the Conference of the Parties (COP) to consider the need to update the LDC work programme and to make recommendations for consideration by SBI 48 (April–May 2018).
			54.	The SBI noted with appreciation the continued active engagement and collaboration of the LEG with the Adaptation Committee, the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, other constituted bodies under the Convention, and the SBSTA on the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, as well as the continued active engagement with a wide range of relevant organizations, agencies and regional centres and networks. The SBI welcomed the efforts of the LEG to provide coherent and integrated support to countries in relation to their NAPs.
			55.	The SBI requested the LEG to continue to prioritize its activities under its work programme, subject to the availability of resources.
	IX.	National adaptation plans
		(Agenda item 9)
			56.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Fugl and Ms. Latasi. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of how to enhance reporting related to the process to formulate and implement NAPs at SBI 49 (December 2018) taking into account activities being considered under other agenda items.
	X.	Development and transfer of technologies: scope and modalities for the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism in relation to supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 10)
		1.	Proceedings
			57.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.2 and the submissions related to this agenda item. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Elfriede-Anna More (Austria) and Mr. Washington Zhakata (Zimbabwe). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below. After that, the Chair informed Parties that an information note prepared by the co-facilitators, capturing the issues discussed at this session, was available on the SBI in-session document web page.
		2.	Conclusions
			58.	The SBI continued its elaboration of the scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment of the effectiveness of the Technology Mechanism and adequacy of the support provided to the Technology Mechanism in supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement on matters relating to technology development and transfer, as per decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 70 (hereinafter referred to as the periodic assessment).
			59.	The SBI took note of the views submitted by Parties and observers on the scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment, and the compilation and synthesis of the submissions prepared by the secretariat.
			60.	The SBI requested the secretariat to prepare a technical paper on the experience, lessons learned and best practices in conducting reviews of various arrangements under the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol that are relevant for the periodic assessment, including a list of such reviews, by SBI 47 with a view to informing the deliberations of the SBI on elaborating the scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment.
			61.	The SBI agreed to continue elaborating the scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment, taking into account Parties’ deliberations at this session and the information contained in the technical paper referred to in paragraph 60 above, at SBI 48.
	XI.	Matters relating to climate finance
(Agenda item 11)
		A.	Review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance
(Agenda sub-item 11(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				62.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. It had before it the submissions related to this agenda sub-item. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Delphine Eyraud (France) and Mr. Festus Luboyera (Uganda). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				63.	The SBI initiated work on the review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance (SCF) in accordance with the terms of reference contained in the annex to decision 9/CP.22.
				64.	The SBI took note of the views submitted by members of the SCF, Parties, the constituted bodies under the Convention and external stakeholders.
				65.	The SBI welcomed the submission provided by the SCF and noted the progress made to date by the SCF in fulfilling the mandates received.
				66.	The SBI acknowledged the important contribution of the SCF in assisting the COP in exercising its functions in relation to the Financial Mechanism, particularly through the biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows, the preparation of draft guidance to the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, and the organization of the forum of the SCF, while recognizing the potential for improvements in the exercise of its current mandate and functions.
				67.	The SBI emphasized the need to continue to enhance all the functions of the SCF, including, inter alia, in the following areas:
					(a)	The quality of the biennial assessments;
					(b)	The dissemination and utilization of outputs and recommendations provided by the SCF, including those resulting from the forum of the SCF;
					(c)	The participation of members in meetings of the SCF and working modalities of the SCF.
				68.	The SBI requested the secretariat, in preparing the technical paper on the review of the functions of the SCF in accordance with decision 9/CP.22, paragraph 5, to take into account the deliberations and conclusions of SBI 46 and the submissions made in response to decision 9/CP.22, paragraph 3, and the self-assessment by the SCF, in accordance with the terms of reference for the review.
				69.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 47 with a view to recommending a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption at COP 23 (November 2017).
		B.	Third review of the Adaptation Fund
(Agenda sub-item 11(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				70.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. It had before it the submissions related to this agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Patience Damptey (Ghana) and Mr. Herman Sips (Netherlands). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				71.	The SBI initiated its consideration of the third review of the Adaptation Fund, in accordance with decision 1/CMP.12, paragraph 3, and in line with the mandate of the Adaptation Fund as reflected in the relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP).
				72.	The SBI welcomed with appreciation the submissions on the third review of the Adaptation Fund from Parties and observer organizations as well as other interested international organizations, stakeholders and NGOs involved in the activities of the Adaptation Fund.
				73.	The SBI reiterated the request to the secretariat, in preparing the technical paper on the third review of the Adaptation Fund, to take into account the submissions referred to in paragraph 72 above in accordance with decision 1/CMP.12 and the terms of reference for the review contained in its annex.
				74.	The SBI recognized the important role that the Adaptation Fund has played and continues to play and the unique features that have enabled the fund to significantly contribute to meeting the support needs of developing country Parties for concrete adaptation projects, programmes and readiness development.
				75.	The SBI also recognized that the outcomes of the third review of the Adaptation Fund do not prejudge the negotiations under the APA on the Adaptation Fund serving the Paris Agreement, but will provide relevant information to enable Parties to take an informed decision.
				76.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of the third review of the Adaptation Fund at SBI 47 with a view to recommending a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption at CMP 13 (November 2017).
	XII.	Matters relating to capacity-building
(Agenda item 12)
		A.	Capacity-building under the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 12(a))
			77.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2017/2 and Add.1, FCCC/SBI/2017/3 and FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.5, and the submissions related to this agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Marzena Chodor (Poland) and Mr. Bubu Jallow (Gambia). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this agenda sub-item at SBI 47.
		B.	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 12(b))
			78.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2017/2 and Add.1, FCCC/SBI/2017/3 and FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.5, and the submissions related to this agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Chodor and Mr. Jallow. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this agenda sub-item at SBI 47.
	XIII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
(Agenda item 13)
		A.	Improved forum and work programme
			(Agenda sub-item 13(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				79.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with SBSTA agenda sub-item 7(a) and to establish a contact group to convene the 3rd meeting of the improved forum, co-chaired by the Chair of the SBI and the Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize), and assisted by Ms. Nataliya Kushko (Ukraine) and Mr. Andrei Marcu (Panama). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				80.	The SBI and the SBSTA convened the 3rd meeting of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				81.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note with appreciation of the technical paper prepared by the secretariat on just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs.
				82.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed with appreciation the summary of the meeting of the ad hoc technical expert group (TEG) held in Bonn on 9 and 10 May 2017, presented by the co-chairs of the TEG, which provided further technical elaboration on the two areas of the work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures in the context of sustainable development. The SBI and the SBSTA expressed their gratitude to the members of the TEG and the secretariat for the organization of the TEG meeting and their work and discussed the contribution of the TEG to the work of the improved forum.
				83.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the co-chairs of the TEG to prepare, with the support of the secretariat, and building on the summary of the TEG meeting referred to in paragraph 82 above, a detailed report of the discussion of the TEG at its meeting referred to in paragraph 82 above, for consideration at SBI 47 and SBSTA 47 (November 2017).
				84.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties and observers to submit, by 30 September 2017, their views on aspects related to economic diversification and transformation and just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs, in the context of sustainable development, with a view to informing the in-forum discussion on possible needs for modelling tools, including capacity-building opportunities, to take place at SBI 47 and SBSTA 47 and the in-forum training workshop on the use of economic modelling tools at SBI 48 and SBSTA 48 (April–May 2018).
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures
			(Agenda sub-item 13(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				85.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its resumed 3rd meeting, on 18 May. At the resumed 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with SBSTA agenda sub-item 7(b) in a contact group co-chaired by the Chairs of the SBI and the SBSTA, assisted by Ms. Kushko and Mr. Marcu. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below. At the same meeting, the SBI chair informed Parties that he would request the co-facilitators of the informal consultations to assist him and the SBSTA Chair in updating the reflections note referred to in paragraph 86 below.
			2.	Conclusions
				86.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the reflections note prepared by their Chairs, and took note of the discussion during these sessions on the modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures. The SBI and the SBSTA agreed that the recommendation being prepared under this agenda sub-item for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) at its first session will include language for the CMA to take the necessary procedural steps to enable the forum to serve the Paris Agreement as per decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 33 and 34.
				87.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties and observers to submit, by 30 September 2017, their views, based on the discussion and the reflections note referred to in paragraph 86 above, on concrete elements of the modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				88.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize, under the guidance of the Chairs of the SBI and the SBSTA, a pre-sessional workshop before SBI 47 and SBSTA 47 that will focus on the elements of the modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				89.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested their Chairs, with the support of the secretariat, to update the reflections note referred to in paragraph 86 above after the pre-sessional workshop referred to in paragraph 88 above.
				90.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat pursuant to the provisions contained in paragraph 88 above.
				91.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		C.	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol
			(Agenda sub-item 13(c))
		D.	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10
			(Agenda sub-item 13(d))
				92.	The SBI considered agenda sub-items 13(c) and (d) at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to the Chair’s proposal that substantive discussions under these sub-items be held in the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures jointly with agenda sub-item 13(a). At the 3rd meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that no specific conclusions had been reached on these matters. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to continue its consideration of these matters at SBI 47.
	XIV.	Scope of the next periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it
		(Agenda item 14)
		1.	Proceedings
			93.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item jointly with SBSTA agenda sub-item 6(b) in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Leon Charles (Grenada) and Mr. Frank McGovern (Ireland). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			94.	The SBSTA and the SBI further considered the scope of the next periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it (hereinafter referred to as the next periodic review) in accordance with their mandate from COP 21.
			95.	The SBSTA and the SBI recalled that the COP decided that subsequent reviews should take place following the adoption of an assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) or at least every seven years.
			96.	The SBSTA and the SBI also recalled that, at their forty-fourth sessions and in the context of the scope of the next periodic review, they noted the relevant work on the global stocktake under the APA, the facilitative dialogue, which will take place in 2018, and the technical examination processes. They further recalled the request by the COP to the SBSTA, the SBI, the APA and the constituted bodies under the Convention to accelerate their work on the work programme described in decision 1/CMA.1, paragraphs 5–7, and to forward the outcomes to COP 24 (December 2018) at the latest.
			97.	The SBSTA and the SBI recalled that the COP invited the IPCC to provide a special report in 2018 on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways.,
			98.	The SBSTA and the SBI noted that the 2013–2015 review, including its successes and shortcomings, can provide lessons for the next periodic review.
			99.	In order to ensure that the next periodic review is conducted in an effective and efficient manner, avoiding duplication of work and taking into account the results of relevant work conducted under the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol, the Paris Agreement and the subsidiary bodies, the SBSTA and the SBI agreed to recommend a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 23.
	XV.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings
		(Agenda item 15)
		1.	Proceedings
			100.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2017/5, FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.3 and FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.7, and the submissions related to this agenda item. At the 1st meeting, a representative from the incoming Presidency of the COP (Fiji) made a statement. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in a contact group chaired by Mr. Colin Beck (Solomon Islands). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			101.	The SBI took note of document FCCC/SBI/2017/5.
			102.	The SBI took note with appreciation of the preparations by the secretariat and the Governments of Fiji and Germany for ensuring the success of the United Nations Climate Change Conference to be held in November 2017 in Bonn, the seat of the secretariat, and presided over by the Government of Fiji. The SBI emphasized the importance of following the principles of openness, transparency and inclusiveness, and adhering to established procedures on decision-making in making the arrangements for the conference.
			103.	The SBI noted that significant progress needs to be made at the conference on the Paris Agreement work programme as well as in the further implementation of other mandates and initiatives aimed at achieving the ultimate objective of the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol.
			104.	The SBI requested the secretariat to take note of the views expressed by Parties on the possible elements of the provisional agendas for COP 23 and CMP 13. The SBI noted that the agenda for the first session of the CMA was adopted at the first part of its first session. The SBI also noted decisions 1/CMA.1, paragraph 10, and 1/CP.22, paragraph 11.
			105.	The SBI noted the desire of Parties to maximize the time available to the three subsidiary bodies to advance their work during COP 23 to facilitate the timely conclusion of the work on the Paris Agreement work programme in 2018.
			106.	In this regard, the SBI recommended that the SBSTA, the SBI and the APA conclude their work by noon on Wednesday, 15 November, in order that, inter alia, draft texts can be made available in all six official United Nations languages for adoption, and that the high-level segment commence in the afternoon of 15 November. The SBI therefore invited the Presidency and incoming Presidency, in consultation with the secretariat and the COP Bureau, to finalize the details of the arrangements for COP 23, including arrangements for the high-level segment.
			107.	The SBI agreed to continue to have joint meetings of the governing bodies during the high-level segment, and invited the secretariat to make arrangements for the delivery of concise national statements by ministers and other heads of delegation, with a recommended time limit of three minutes, and statements by representatives of intergovernmental organizations (IGOs) and NGOs, with a recommended time limit of two minutes.
			108.	The SBI emphasized the importance of enhancing action on climate change and of the mandated high-level event on enhancing climate action to be convened at COP 23.
			109.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to the Government of Poland for offering to host COP 24 in December 2018.
			110.	The SBI reiterated its appreciation for the successful collaboration between the current Presidency and the incoming Presidency in preparation for COP 23.
			111.	The SBI noted that, in keeping with the principle of rotation among regional groups, the President of COP 25 (November 2019) would come from the Latin American and Caribbean States and the President of COP 26 (November 2020) would come from the Western European and other States. The SBI invited Parties to come forward with offers to host COP 25 and COP 26.
			112.	The SBI recommended the following dates for the sessional periods in 2022, for consideration at COP 23:
				(a)	First sessional period: Monday, 6 June, to Thursday, 16 June;
				(b)	Second sessional period: Monday, 7 November, to Friday, 18 November.
			113.	The SBI welcomed the efforts of the presiding officers of the subsidiary bodies to ensure the coordination, coherence, management and due process of related issues being considered, within mandated timelines, by the subsidiary bodies. In this regard, the SBI recommended that regular stocktaking meetings be convened to assess progress and invited the secretariat to continue to regularly update the progress tracker for the work programme resulting from the relevant requests contained in decision 1/CP.21.
			114.	The SBI encouraged the presiding officers, in consultation with the secretariat, to consider organizing joint plenary meetings of the subsidiary bodies to hear statements, with a view to improving time management and enhancing the coherence and coordination of the consideration of issues across the bodies.
			115.	The SBI recommended that the dates for the first sessional periods in 2018 and 2019 be amended to Monday, 30 April, to Friday, 11 May 2018, and Monday, 17 June, to Friday, 28 June 2019, respectively.
			116.	The SBI underscored the paramount importance of the principles of inclusiveness and transparency of the UNFCCC process and the value of the effective engagement of non-Party stakeholders and their contributions to the deliberations on substantive issues.
			117.	The SBI took note of the summary report on the views of Parties, observer organizations and interested United Nations agencies on opportunities to further enhance the effective engagement of non-Party stakeholders with a view to strengthening the implementation of the provisions of decision 1/CP.21 and the summary report on the in-session workshop on opportunities to further enhance the effective engagement of non-Party stakeholders with a view to strengthening the implementation of the provisions of decision 1/CP.21, held on 9 May 2017.
			118.	The SBI expressed appreciation for the active participation of both Parties and non-Party stakeholders in the in-session workshop referred to in paragraph 117 above and welcomed the wide range of proposals and the constructive exchange of views.
			119.	The SBI identified opportunities to further enhance the openness, transparency and inclusiveness of the effective engagement of non-Party stakeholders, reflecting the proposals and views expressed in the in-session workshop, through, inter alia:
				(a)	Inviting the presiding officers of the subsidiary bodies and constituted bodies, subject to the availability of funding, time and space:
					(i)	To increase opportunities for admitted observer organizations to make interventions and provide regular briefings on the advancement of work;
					(ii)	To make greater use of inputs by non-Party stakeholders in workshops and technical meetings, as well as through submissions;
				(b)	Encouraging future Presidencies, subject to the availability of resources:
					(i)	To explore ways to enable admitted NGO constituencies to have an open dialogue with Parties, whereby agenda-setting as well as programming of the dialogue are conducted jointly among the admitted NGO constituencies, the Presidency, the Bureau and the secretariat as appropriate, on the understanding that any outcomes of such a dialogue should have persuasive value only, respecting the Party-driven nature of the UNFCCC process;
					(ii)	To explore, within the existing processes and draft rules of procedure being applied and under the existing agenda items, ways of exchanging information on best practices and on gaps and challenges to public participation and public access to information with regard to nationally determined contributions and NAPs;
				(c)	Inviting the secretariat, subject to the availability of resources:
					(i)	To explore ways to enhance the capability of the online registration system to accommodate more flexible participation of various categories of participants, such as Parties and observer States, United Nations organizations, admitted IGOs, admitted NGOs and experts invited to specific events;
					(ii)	To enhance existing practices for the facilitation of non-Party stakeholder participation with a view to promoting the openness, transparency and inclusiveness of the UNFCCC process;
					(iii)	To further enhance Parties’ access to submissions from non-Party stakeholders;
					(iv)	To further encourage participation through enhanced virtual tools in order to support engagement of, and opportunities for, all non-Party stakeholders in the UNFCCC process.
			120.	The SBI invited Parties and non-Party stakeholders to submit their views, by 31 January 2018, and agreed to take stock at SBI 48 of progress in the implementation of the SBI conclusions on non-Party stakeholder engagement with a view to considering how such engagement can be further enhanced.
			121.	The SBI took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 119 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of resources.
	XVI.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
		(Agenda item 16)
		A.	Programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019
(Agenda sub-item 16(a))
		B.	Other financial and budgetary matters
(Agenda sub-item 16(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				122.	The SBI considered agenda sub-items 16(a) and (b) at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2017/4 and Add.1 and 2, and FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.4. Representatives of two Parties made statements. At the resumed 1st meeting, the Chair invited the Executive Secretary to introduce sub-item 16(a) and invited a representative from the secretariat to provide an oral report on sub-item 16(b). At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider agenda sub-item 16(a) in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Georg Boersting (Norway) and Mr. Tosi Mpanu Mpanu (Democratic Republic of the Congo). Mr. Amena Yauvoli (Fiji) replaced Mr. Mpanu Mpanu, who had to leave the conference, in the course of the session. At the same meeting, the SBI also agreed to consider the proposed budget for the international transaction log (ITL) and a methodology for the collection of its fees for the biennium 2018–2019 in an independent spin-off group to be facilitated by Ms. Laurence Mortier (Switzerland). At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBI further agreed that the contact group established under sub-item 16(a) would consider document FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.4, presented under sub-item 16(b).
				123.	At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				124.	The SBI considered the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019 and the proposed budget for the ITL for the biennium 2018–2019.
				125.	It recommended that COP 23 approve a core programme budget of EUR 56,889,092 for the biennium 2018–2019.
				126.	The SBI authorized the Execuxtive Secretary to notify Parties of their 2018 contributions, based on the budget amount shown in paragraph 125 above, after taking into account the special annual contribution from the Host Government of EUR 766,938.
				127.	The SBI authorized the Executive Secretary to notify the Parties concerned of their annual fee for 2018 for the connection of their national registry to, and use of, the ITL and for the related activities of the ITL administrator.
				128.	The SBI, without prejudice to future processes, requested the secretariat to prepare a revised document of the work programme with budget allocations based on documents FCCC/SBI/2017/4/Add.1 and FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.8 and the inputs received and views expressed by Parties, for consideration at SBI 47.
				129.	It requested the secretariat, subject to the availability of financial resources, to organize a technical workshop, to be held in the margins of SBI 47, with the aim of discussing possible ways to increase the efficiency and transparency of the budget process, taking into account the information made available on the UNFCCC website, including issues such as:
					(a)	Options to increase flexibility of the funds in the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities;
					(b)	Ways to address outstanding contributions to the core budget;
					(c)	The allocation of resources in the Trust Fund for the Core Budget of the UNFCCC and the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities;
					(d)	The level of the working capital reserve.
				130.	It requested its Chair to report on the outcome of the technical workshop referred to in paragraph 129 above for consideration at SBI 47, with a view to providing guidance to the secretariat in the implementation of the programme budget.
				131.	It also requested the secretariat to prepare a report on the outcome of the technical workshop referred to in paragraph 129 above for consideration at SBI 48.
				132.	The SBI recommended a draft decision on the programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019 for consideration and adoption at COP 23 and invited the CMA at the second part of its first session (November 2017) to take note of the decision once adopted by the COP. It also recommended a draft decision on the programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019 as it applies to the Kyoto Protocol for consideration and adoption at CMP 13.
				133.	The SBI further recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at CMP 13 on the budget for the ITL and a methodology for the collection of its fees for the biennium 2018–2019.
		C.	Continuing review of functions and operations of the secretariat
(Agenda sub-item 16(c))
			1.	Proceedings
				134.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.6. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below. After that, the Chair reminded Parties that SBI 21 had agreed to review the functions and operations of the secretariat annually, and that the SBI will consider this agenda sub-item next at SBI 48.
			2.	Conclusions
				135.	The SBI took note of the information provided by the Executive Secretary on common practices ensuring transparency in the selection of the executive heads of the UNFCCC and relevant United Nations programmes, specialized agencies and related organizations.
				136.	The SBI noted with appreciation the views expressed by Parties on ensuring full transparency of the selection processes for the Executive Secretary and his/her deputy.
				137.	The SBI also noted that the recent selection of the Deputy Executive Secretary at the level of Assistant Secretary-General was undertaken according to the United Nations principles and practices.
				138.	The SBI affirmed that, on the basis of established practice at the UNFCCC secretariat, the processes for future selection of the Executive Secretary and his/her deputy should continue to be undertaken in line with the United Nations principles and practices as outlined in the note referred to in paragraph 135 above, including provisions for timely information and consultation with the COP, through its Bureau, to ensure full transparency.
		D.	Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 16(d))
			1.	Proceedings
				139.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited the Executive Secretary to introduce this sub-item, after which he invited a representative of the Government of Germany, host of the secretariat, to make a statement. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to the Chair’s proposal to prepare draft conclusions on this this matter, with the assistance of the secretariat and in consultation with interested Parties. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				140.	The SBI took note of the information provided by the Executive Secretary and the representative of the Host Government of the secretariat on the progress made in the design and construction of the extension building on the United Nations Campus, which will enable the entire secretariat to be located at the same premises by 2020. It reiterated its satisfaction with the excellent facilities that the new conference centre has been providing for UNFCCC sessions and meetings since its opening in 2015, and requested the secretariat to continue maximizing the combined use of the secretariat’s office facilities and the conference centre for UNFCCC sessions and meetings in order to reduce costs and further enhance the services available at the seat of the secretariat.
				141.	The SBI thanked both the Host Government and the host city of Bonn for their continuous provision of support for UNFCCC sessions and meetings at the seat of the secretariat, including the repeated special financial contributions by the Host Government for the sessions of the permanent subsidiary bodies and ad hoc working groups held in Bonn. The SBI noted with appreciation the current joint efforts of the secretariat, the Host Government, the city of Bonn and other stakeholders to provide the necessary facilities and services for the United Nations Climate Change Conference to be held in November 2017 in Bonn.
				142.	The SBI welcomed the systematic collaboration between the Host Government, the secretariat and other relevant stakeholders on issues such as meeting and office facilities as well as enhanced services and information for meeting participants. It encouraged the Host Government and the secretariat to maintain this process of close and regular consultation.
				143.	The SBI requested the secretariat to continue to update Parties on the UNFCCC website about these and other aspects of the implementation of the Headquarters Agreement, and invited the Host Government and the Executive Secretary to report to SBI 50 on progress made.
	XVII.	Other matters
		(Agenda item 17)
			144.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting. No other matter was raised by Parties.
	XVIII.	Closure of and report on the session
		(Agenda item 18)
		1.	Address by the incoming President of the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-third session
			145.	Prior to the opening of the SBI closing plenary meeting on 18 May (the 3rd meeting), the SBI Chair welcomed the Prime Minister of Fiji, Mr. Frank Bainimarama, who addressed delegates from the podium as the incoming President of COP 23. In his address, he set out his vision for Fiji's presidency of COP 23 and launched Fiji’s COP 23 website. A video showing the impacts of climate change on Fiji was screened.
		2.	Administrative and budgetary implications
			146.	At the resumed 3rd meeting, a representative of the secretariat provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during the session in accordance with the provisions of rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
			147.	He informed the SBI that there were a number of activities resulting from the negotiations at the session that call for support by the secretariat and require additional resources over and above the approved core budget for the biennium 2016–2017. These comprise:
				(a)	Under SBI agenda item 10, “Development and transfer of technologies: scope and modalities for the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism in relation to supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement”, the preparation of a technical paper on the experience, lessons learned and best practices in conducting reviews of various arrangements under the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol will be absorbed by the secretariat within available resources;
				(b)	Under agenda sub-item 13(b), “Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures”, funding in the amount of EUR 35,000 will be required to organize a pre-sessional workshop before SBI 47 and SBSTA 47. For the information of Parties, the same costs are also reported under SBSTA agenda sub-item 7(b);
				(c)	Under agenda item 15, “Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings”, funding in the amount of EUR 178,000 will be required to enhance the capability of the online registration system to accommodate more flexible participation of various categories of participants and to facilitate the collection of views from Parties and non-Party stakeholders.
			148.	He also stated that the amount of EUR 213,000 was preliminary and was based on the information available at that time. He expressed the hope that the secretariat could count on the continued generosity of Parties to provide additional funding in a timely and predictable manner. He further informed the SBI that some of the conclusions adopted at this session will have budgetary implications beyond 2017. The resource requirements for the biennium 2018–2019 will be reviewed in the context of established budgetary procedures.
			149.	The SBI Chair noted that without supplementary contributions the secretariat will not be in a position to provide the requested support.
		3.	Closure of and report on the session
			150.	At its resumed 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session.
			151.	Due to time constraints, statements could not be delivered at the closing plenary meeting. The Chair thanked Parties for their support and closed the session.
			
