| c | United Nations | FCCC/SBI/2018/9 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 3 July 2018  Original: English |

| Subsidiary Body for Implementation |  |

Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on the first part of its forty-eighth session, held in Bonn from 
30 April to 10 May 2018
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)		1–2	4
		II.	Organizational matters 
(Agenda item 2)		3–12	4
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		3–5	4
		B.	Organization of the work of the session 		6–9	6
		C.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and 
analysis process		10–11	6
		D.	Other mandated events		12	7
			III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 3)		13–14	7
		A.	Status of submission and review of seventh national communications and 
third biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		13	7
		B.	Compilation and synthesis of second biennial reports from Parties included 
in Annex I to the Convention		14	7
			IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda item 4)		15–18	8
		A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included 
in Annex I to the Convention			8
		B.	Review of the terms of reference of the Consultative Group of Experts on 
National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the 
Convention		15	8
		C.	Provision of financial and technical support		16	8
		D.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of 
Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention		17	8
		E.	Revision of the modalities and guidelines for international consultation and 
analysis		18	8
		
			V.	Common time frames for nationally determined contributions referred to in 
Article 4, paragraph 10, of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 5)		19–24	9
			VI.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public 
registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 6)		25–28	9
			VII.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public 
registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 7)		29–32	10
			VIII.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism 
(Agenda item 8)		33	10
			IX.	Coordination of support for the implementation of activities in relation to 
mitigation actions in the forest sector by developing countries, including 
institutional arrangements 
(Agenda item 9)		34–36	11
			X.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture 
(Agenda item 10)		37–45	11
			XI.	Report of the Adaptation Committee 
(Agenda item 11)		46–49	12
			XII.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
 (Agenda item 12)		50–66	13
			XIII.	National adaptation plans 
(Agenda item 13)		67–74	14
			XIV.	Development and transfer of technologies 
(Agenda item 14)		75–83	15
		A.	Scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment of the Technology 
Mechanism in relation to supporting the implementation of the Paris 
Agreement		75–80	15
		B.	Review of the effective implementation of the Climate Technology Centre 
and Network		81–83	16
			XV.	Matters related to climate finance: identification of the information to be provided 
by Parties in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 15)		84–88	16
			XVI.	Matters relating to capacity-building for developing countries 
(Agenda item 16)		89–104	17
		A.	Capacity-building under the Convention		89–97	17
		B.	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol		98–104	18
			XVII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures 
(Agenda item 17)		105–117	19
		A.	Improved forum and work programme		105–112	19
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of 
the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures 		113–116	20
		C.	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol			20
		D.	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10 		117	20
			XVIII.	Ways of enhancing the implementation of education, training, public awareness, 
public participation and public access to information so as to enhance actions under 
the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 18)		118–125	21
			XIX.	Gender and climate change 
(Agenda item 19)		126	22
			XX.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings 
(Agenda item 20)		127–144	22
			XXI.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
(Agenda item 21)		145–156	24
		A.	Continuous review of the functions and operations of the secretariat		145	24
		B.	Budgetary matters		146–156	24
			XXII.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 22)		157	25
			XXIII.	Closure of and report on the session 
(Agenda item 23)		158–165	25
		Annexes
		I.	Koronivia road map		27
		II.	Scope of the review of the work of the improved forum		29
		
Addendum – FCCC/SBI/2018/9/Add.1
Draft decisions and conclusions forwarded for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
	Draft decision -/CP.24. Least developed countries work programme
	Draft decision -/CP.24. Review of the Climate Technology Centre and Network
	Draft decision -/CMA.1. Ways of enhancing the implementation of education, training
public awareness, public participation and public access to information so as
to enhance actions under the Paris Agreement
	Draft conclusions of the Conference of the Parties on the terms of reference for the review of the Doha work programme
	Draft conclusions of the Conference of the Parties on coordination of support for the implementation of activities in relation to mitigation actions in the forest sector by developing countries, including institutional arrangements
	
	I.	Opening of the session
(Agenda item 1)
		1.	The first part of the forty-eighth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) was held at the World Conference Center Bonn in Bonn, Germany, from 30 April to 10 May 2018.
		2.	The Chair of the SBI, Mr. Emmanuel Dumisani Dlamini (Eswatini), opened the session on Monday, 30 April, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Ms. Tugba Icmeli (Turkey) as Rapporteur and informed the SBI that the Vice-Chair of the SBI, Mr. Naser Moghaddasi (Islamic Republic of Iran), could not attend the session.
	II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
			(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
				3.	At its 1st meeting, on 30 April, the SBI considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBI/2018/1 and Corr.1).
				4.	Further to consultations with Parties regarding the consistency of the title of provisional agenda sub-item 14(a) since the matter was last considered, the Chair proposed and the SBI agreed to amend the title to “Scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism in relation to supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement”.
				5.	At the same meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBI adopted the agenda as corrected and orally amended, with sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance, as follows:
					1.	Opening of the session.
					2.	Organizational matters:
						(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
						(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
						(c)	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process;
						(d)	Other mandated events.
					3.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention:
						(a)	Status of submission and review of seventh national communications and third biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
						(b)	Compilation and synthesis of second biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention.
					4.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention:
						(a)	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (agenda sub-item held in abeyance);
						(b)	Review of the terms of reference of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention;
						(c)	Provision of financial and technical support;
						(d)	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention;
						(e)	Revision of the modalities and guidelines for international consultation and analysis.
					5.	Common time frames for nationally determined contributions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 10, of the Paris Agreement.
					6.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
					7.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
					8.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism.
					9.	Coordination of support for the implementation of activities in relation to mitigation actions in the forest sector by developing countries, including institutional arrangements.
					10.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture.
					11.	Report of the Adaptation Committee.
					12.	Matters relating to the least developed countries.
					13.	National adaptation plans.
					14.	Development and transfer of technologies:
						(a)	Scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism in relation to supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement;
						(b)	Review of the effective implementation of the Climate Technology Centre and Network.
					15.	Matters related to climate finance: identification of the information to be provided by Parties in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement.
					16.	Matters relating to capacity-building for developing countries:
						(a)	Capacity-building under the Convention;
						(b)	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol.
					17.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
						(a)	Improved forum and work programme;
						(b)	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures;
						(c)	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol;
						(d)	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10.
					18.	Ways of enhancing the implementation of education, training, public awareness, public participation and public access to information so as to enhance actions under the Paris Agreement.
					19.	Gender and climate change.
					20.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings.
					21.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters:
						(a)	Continuous review of the functions and operations of the secretariat;
						(b)	Budgetary matters.
					22.	Other matters.
					23.	Closure of and report on the session.
		B.	Organization of the work of the session
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			6.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. The Chair drew attention to the deadline for all groups to conclude their work by 6 p.m. on Tuesday, 8 May, to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary, which was to be convened on Thursday, 10 May. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to proceed on that basis and in line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
			7.	At its 2nd meeting, on 30 April, which was held jointly with the 2nd meeting of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) and the 13th meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Paris Agreement (APA), statements were made by representatives of 21 Parties, including 14 on behalf of groups of Parties, namely: the African Group; the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS); the Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; the Coalition for Rainforest Nations; the Environmental Integrity Group; the European Union and its member States; the Group of 77 and China (G77 and China); the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; the least developed countries (LDCs); the Like-minded Developing Countries (LMDCs); and the Umbrella Group. Statements were also made on behalf of business and industry non-governmental organizations (NGOs), environmental NGOs, indigenous peoples organizations, local government and municipal authorities, research and independent NGOs, trade union NGOs, women and gender NGOs and youth NGOs.
			8.	On 5 May, the SBI Chair, the SBSTA Chair and the APA Co-Chairs convened a joint informal plenary to inform Parties on progress in the work of the SBI, the SBSTA and the APA pertaining to the implementation of the Paris Agreement work programme (PAWP). The joint meeting was organized in response to Parties’ request to address the linkages in the work of the subsidiary bodies on the implementation of the PAWP and to manage the work under the PAWP in a coherent and balanced manner.
			9.	At its 4th meeting, on 10 May, which was held jointly with the 4th meeting of the SBSTA and the 15th meeting of the APA, closing statements were heard (see para. 164 below).
		C.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			10.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided by the Chair on the organization of the workshop for the facilitative sharing of views (FSV) under the international consultation and analysis (ICA) process, which was to take place on 4 May.
			11.	The Chair drew attention to the ICA modalities and guidelines as well as the FSV web pages. He informed the SBI that the output of the ICA process will include, for each of the Parties participating in the FSV workshop, a record of the proceedings of the FSV session and a summary report as the outcome of the technical analysis of the Party’s biennial update report.
		D.	Other mandated events
(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
			12.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided on the other mandated events being held at this session, highlighting the technical expert meetings on mitigation and adaptation that form the core of the technical examination processes, and the Suva expert dialogue, organized by the secretariat under the guidance of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts. The Chair emphasized that the purpose of the Suva expert dialogue is to explore a wide range of information, inputs and views on ways to facilitate the mobilization and securing of expertise and enhancement of support, including finance, technology and capacity-building, for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, including extreme weather events and slow onset events.
	III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 3)
		A.	Status of submission and review of seventh national communications and third biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(a))
			13.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.7.
		B.	Compilation and synthesis of second biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(b))
			14.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting, on 10 May. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Helen Plume (New Zealand) and Ms. Anne Rasmussen (Samoa). At the 3rd meeting, the Chair reported that the consultations had not resulted in any conclusions. In accordance with rules 10(c) and 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, this matter will be included on the provisional agenda for SBI 49 (December 2018).
	IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 4)
		A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance)
		B.	Review of the terms of reference of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 4(b))
			15.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. Statements were made by representatives of eight Parties, including on behalf of the G77 and China, the African Group and a group of four Parties. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Plume and Ms. Rasmussen. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 49.
		C.	Provision of financial and technical support
(Agenda sub-item 4(c))
			16.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. A representative of one Party made a statement on behalf of the G77 and China. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Plume and Ms. Rasmussen. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 49.
		D.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 4(d))
			17.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the summary reports made available on the UNFCCC website by 10 March 2018.
		E.	Revision of the modalities and guidelines for international consultation and analysis
(Agenda sub-item 4(e))
			18.	The SBI initiated its consideration of this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and agreed to continue its consideration of the matter at SBI 50 (June 2019).
	V.	Common time frames for nationally determined contributions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 10, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 5)
		1.	Proceedings
			19.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Marianne Karlsen (Norway) and Mr. George Wamukoya (Kenya). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			20.	The SBI continued its consideration of common time frames for nationally determined contributions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 10, of the Paris Agreement.
			21.	The SBI took note of the request for it to report back thereon to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) at its first session.
			22.	The SBI welcomed the submissions from Parties received in response to the invitation of SBI 47 on this matter.
			23.	The SBI took note of the rich and constructive exchange among Parties on relevant issues related to this agenda item, including but not limited to the time of applicability of, usefulness of and options for common time frames, as well as the advantages and disadvantages of those options.
			24.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 48.2 (September 2018) with a view to making a recommendation thereon for consideration and adoption by the CMA.
	VI.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 6)
		1.	Proceedings
			25.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. Statements were made by representatives of 10 Parties, including on behalf of the African Group, AOSIS, the Arab Group, the Environmental Integrity Group, the European Union and the LMDCs. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Madeleine Diouf Sarr (Senegal) and Mr. Peer Stiansen (Norway). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			26.	The SBI continued its consideration of a public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement based on the informal note by the co-facilitators at SBI 47 on this matter.
			27.	The SBI took note of the various views exchanged among Parties at this session on this matter.
			28.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 48.2, drawing upon the informal note by the co-facilitators at SBI 47 on this matter, the deliberations by Parties at this and previous sessions and the views they have submitted.
	VII.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 7)
		1.	Proceedings
			29.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. Statements were made by representatives of 10 Parties, including on behalf of the African Group, AOSIS, the Arab Group, the Environmental Integrity Group, the European Union and the LMDCs. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Diouf Sarr and Mr. Stiansen. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			30.	The SBI continued its consideration of a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement based on the informal note by the co-facilitators at SBI 47 on this matter.
			31.	The SBI took note of the various views exchanged among Parties at this session on this matter.
			32.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 48.2, drawing upon the informal note by the co-facilitators at SBI 47 on this matter, the deliberations by Parties at this and previous sessions and the views they have submitted.
	VIII.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism
(Agenda item 8)
		33.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and agreed to postpone its consideration of the matter to SBI 49.
	IX.	Coordination of support for the implementation of activities in relation to mitigation actions in the forest sector by developing countries, including institutional arrangements
(Agenda item 9)
		1.	Proceedings
			34.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. Representatives of two Parties made statements. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Mr. Keith Anderson (Switzerland) and Mr. Trevor Thompson (Grenada). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			35.	The SBI, in accordance with decision 10/CP.19, paragraph 9, reviewed the outcomes of the meetings referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5 of that decision, and considered existing institutional arrangements or the need for potential governance alternatives for the coordination of support for the implementation of the activities referred to in decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 70.
			36.	The SBI concluded consideration of the matters referred to in decision 10/CP.19, paragraph 9, and recommended draft conclusions for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties (COP) at its twenty-fourth session (December 2018).
	X.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture
(Agenda item 10)
		1.	Proceedings
			37.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the agenda item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 48 agenda item 8 in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Mr. Heikki Granholm (Finland) and Ms. Milagros Sandoval (Peru). A statement was made by a representative of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			38.	The SBI and the SBSTA, recalling Articles 9 and 10 of the Convention and in accordance with decision 4/CP.23, initiated the Koronivia joint work on agriculture (KJWA), taking into consideration the vulnerabilities of agriculture to climate change and approaches to addressing food security. They welcomed the submissions from Parties and observers on elements to be included in this work.
			39.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize the workshops referred to in annex I in conjunction with the specified sessions. They encouraged admitted observers to participate in these workshops.
			40.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the importance of issues, including but not limited to farmers, gender, youth, local communities and indigenous peoples, and encouraged Parties to take them into consideration when making submissions and during the KJWA workshops.
			41.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare a report on each workshop referred to in annex I for consideration at the sessions of the SBI and the SBSTA following the sessions in conjunction with which the workshops took place.
			42.	The SBI and the SBSTA, pursuant to decision 4/CP.23, paragraph 1, also requested the secretariat to invite representatives of the constituted bodies under the Convention to contribute to the work and attend the workshops, in particular the first workshop, on decision 4/CP.23, paragraph 2(a).
			43.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal, for each workshop referred to in annex I, their views on the subject of that workshop by the deadline specified in annex I. They also invited Parties and observers to submit, by 28 September 2020, their views on future topics not listed in decision 4/CP.23 and on the progress of the KJWA for consideration in the report of the SBI and the SBSTA to the COP as per decision 4/CP.23, paragraph 4.
			44.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of this agenda item at SBI 49 and SBSTA 49 (December 2018).
			45.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 39 above. They requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	XI.	Report of the Adaptation Committee
(Agenda item 11)
		1.	Proceedings
			46.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting, on 30 April, and at its 3rd meeting. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the agenda item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 48 agenda item 4 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Patience Damptey (Ghana) and Ms. Gabriela Fischerova (Slovakia).
			47.	The SBI also agreed that the group established under this agenda item would meet jointly with the group established under agenda item 12, “Matters relating to the least developed countries”, to consider the joint recommendations prepared by the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG) and the Adaptation Committee (AC) for consideration and adoption at CMA 1 in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 41 and 45. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			48.	The SBI and the SBSTA continued their consideration of the work of the AC in response to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 42, as well as its work, together with the LEG, in response to decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 41 and 45. They welcomed the progress made in advancing the deliberations on these matters, as captured in the revised informal notes by the co-facilitators.
			49.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue their consideration of these matters on the basis of the revised informal notes referred to in paragraph 48 above at SBI 48.2 and SBSTA 48.2 with a view to making a recommendation to be forwarded at COP 24 for consideration and adoption at CMA 1.
	XII.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
(Agenda item 12)
		1.	Proceedings
			50.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2018/4 and FCCC/SBI/2018/8 and the submissions related to the agenda item. Representatives of two Parties made statements. At the resumed 1st meeting, the Chair invited Mr. Aderito Santana (Sao Tome and Principe), Vice-Chair of the LEG, to report on the group’s activities. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Mamadou Honadia (Burkina Faso) and Mr. Malcolm Ridout (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
			51.	At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBI also agreed that the group established under this agenda item would meet jointly with the group established under agenda item 11, “Report of the Adaptation Committee”, to consider the joint recommendations prepared by the LEG and the AC for consideration and adoption at CMA 1 in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 41 and 45. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			52.	The SBI noted with appreciation the report on the 33rd meeting of the LEG, held in Sao Tome, Sao Tome and Principe, from 5 to 9 February 2018.
			53.	The SBI expressed its gratitude to the Government of Sao Tome and Principe for hosting the meeting.
			54.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to the LEG and the secretariat for their work in supporting the LDCs. It welcomed the two-year rolling work programme of the LEG for 2018–2019, and encouraged the LEG to prioritize its work taking into account the availability of resources.
			55.	The SBI welcomed the work of the LEG in preparing the recommendations on updating the LDC work programme.
			56.	The SBI invited Parties and relevant organizations, including bilateral and multilateral organizations, to continue to provide resources in support of the implementation of the LEG work programme.
			57.	The SBI noted that, as at 30 April 2018, total Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) funding approved during the Global Environment Facility (GEF) fiscal year 2018 amounted to USD 48 million, and that cumulative funding approvals since the establishment of the LDCF amounted to USD 1.2 billion.
			58.	The SBI also noted that, as at 30 April 2018, 21 project proposals for the implementation of national adaptation programmes of action submitted by the LDCs, accounting for a total of USD 156 million, had been technically cleared by the GEF secretariat and were awaiting allocation of resources from the LDCF.
			59.	The SBI noted with appreciation the continued collaboration of the LEG with the Green Climate Fund (GCF) secretariat on providing technical guidance and advice to the LDCs on accessing funding from the GCF for the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans (NAPs).
			60.	The SBI noted that six proposals from the LDCs for the formulation of NAPs had been approved by the GCF secretariat as at 1 May 2018.
			61.	The SBI requested the LEG to consider the elements contained in the report referred to in paragraph 52 above, including the needs related to adaptation arising from the Paris Agreement and the relevant decisions adopted at COP 21, that could be addressed under the LEG work programme in developing its future work programmes, as appropriate.
			62.	The SBI welcomed the information submitted by Parties for use by the LEG in considering the need to update the LDC work programme and in making recommendations for consideration at this session, pursuant to decision 19/CP.21, paragraph 3.
			63.	The SBI noted the report on provisions on support and flexibility for the LDCs and the assistance thereof to a smooth transition from LDC status.
			64.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 50, taking into account, inter alia, the report referred to in paragraph 63 above and the report of the GEF to COP 24, with a view to making recommendations for consideration at COP 25 (November 2019).
			65.	The SBI continued its consideration of the work of the LEG, together with the AC, in response to decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 41 and 45. The SBI took note of the conclusions under its agenda item 11 as they relate to the outcome of the joint meetings with regard to this work.
			66.	The SBI recommended a draft decision on the LDC work programme for consideration and adoption at COP 24.
	XIII.	National adaptation plans
(Agenda item 13)
		1.	Proceedings
			67.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2018/6 and FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.1. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Pepetua Latasi (Tuvalu) and Mr. Ridout. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			68.	The SBI welcomed the successful conduct of the meeting of Party experts to assess progress made in the process to formulate and implement NAPs, held in Sao Tome, Sao Tome and Principe, from 7 to 9 February 2018.
			69.	The SBI also welcomed the successful conduct of the NAP Expo that took place from 4 to 6 April 2018 in Sharm El Sheikh, Egypt, and the active participation of Parties and other relevant stakeholders and further welcomed the offer of the Republic of Korea to host the 2019 NAP Expo.
			70.	The SBI expressed its gratitude to the Government of Sao Tome and Principe for hosting the meeting referred to in paragraph 68 above, and the Government of Egypt for hosting the NAP Expo referred to in paragraph 69 above.
			71.	The SBI welcomed the work of the LEG, the AC and the secretariat in preparing the following documents:
				(a)	The summary of progress in the process to formulate and implement NAPs;
				(b)	The report on progress, experience, best practices, lessons learned, gaps, needs and support provided and received in the process to formulate and implement NAPs;
				(c)	The report on the AC workshop on accessing the Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme of the GCF for adaptation.
			72.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to the LEG and the AC for the successful conduct of the meeting referred to in paragraph 68 above, and to the organizations that contributed to the analysis and assessment of progress.
			73.	The SBI welcomed the work of the LEG in organizing side events during the sessions of the SBI, as appropriate, and invited the LEG to consider extending an invitation to developing country Parties to showcase their examples of national adaptation planning at COP 24, as appropriate, noting the importance of providing examples of national adaptation planning, including benefits and challenges, consistent with the LEG work programme.
			74.	The SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 49 on the basis of the draft text proposed by the co-facilitators of the informal consultations on this agenda item.
	XIV.	Development and transfer of technologies
(Agenda item 14)
		A.	Scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism in relation to supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 14(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				75.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/TP/2017/5. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Ian Lloyd (United States of America) and Ms. Claudia Octaviano (Mexico). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				76.	The SBI continued its elaboration of the scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment of the effectiveness of the Technology Mechanism and adequacy of the support provided to the Technology Mechanism in supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement on matters relating to technology development and transfer (hereinafter referred to as the periodic assessment).
				77.	The SBI welcomed the technical paper by the secretariat on experience, lessons learned and best practices in conducting reviews of various arrangements under the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol relevant to the periodic assessment.
				78.	The SBI took into account decision 1/CP.23, paragraph 2 and annex I, and accelerated its work on elaborating the scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment.
				79.	The SBI noted that the co-facilitators of the informal consultations on this agenda sub-item prepared an informal note on the basis of the deliberations of Parties at this and previous sessions of the SBI and their submitted views.
				80.	The SBI agreed to continue elaborating the scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment at SBI 48.2 taking into account the informal note referred to in paragraph 79 above.
		B.	Review of the effective implementation of the Climate Technology Centre and Network
(Agenda sub-item 14(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				81.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.5. A representative of one Party made a statement. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Stella Gama (Malawi) and Mr. Lloyd. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				82.	At the request of the COP, the SBI considered the findings and recommendations of the independent review of the effective implementation of the Climate Technology Centre and Network, and the management response from the United Nations Environment Programme to these findings and recommendations.
				83.	The SBI recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 24.
	XV.	Matters related to climate finance: identification of the information to be provided by Parties in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 15)
		1.	Proceedings
			84.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.5. Representatives of three Parties made statements. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Peter Horne (Australia) and Mr. Seyni Nafo (Mali). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			85.	The SBI considered the identification of the information to be provided by Parties in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement.
			86.	The SBI welcomed the progress made on this matter as reflected in the informal note by the co-facilitators of the informal consultations on this agenda item.
			87.	The SBI requested its Chair to undertake consultations with the Co-Chairs of the APA with a view to ensuring coherence and coordination with regard to the matter referred to in paragraph 85 above.
			88.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 48.2 on the basis of the informal note referred to in paragraph 86 above.
	XVI.	Matters relating to capacity-building for developing countries
(Agenda item 16)
		A.	Capacity-building under the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 16(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				89.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2018/3 and Add.1 and FCCC/SBI/2018/5 and the submissions related to the agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Jeniffer Hanna Collado (Dominican Republic) and Mr. Makoto Kato (Japan). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				90.	The SBI welcomed the synthesis reports prepared by the secretariat to facilitate the regular monitoring and review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries established under decision 2/CP.7 and reaffirmed in subsequent decisions, and the summary report on the 6th Durban Forum on capacity-building.
				91.	The SBI reiterated the value of the objective and scope of capacity-building in developing countries as contained in decision 2/CP.7, and noted that some progress has been made in the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries at the institutional, systemic and individual level.
				92.	The SBI noted the importance of capacity-building in enhancing the effective implementation of the Convention, and that current and emerging areas in the context of the Convention and the Paris Agreement should also be taken into account in the further implementation of the capacity-building framework in developing countries.
				93.	The SBI recognized the value of the Durban Forum on capacity-building and noted that the Forum serves as a means for a continuous exchange of information, good practices and lessons learned among a wide spectrum of stakeholders under and outside the Convention, as well as for providing input to the monitoring and review of the effectiveness of capacity-building.
				94.	The SBI noted with appreciation the progress made to date by the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, which aims to address both current and emerging gaps in implementing capacity-building in developing countries and to further enhance capacity-building efforts.
				95.	The SBI welcomed the shared theme of capacity-building for the implementation of nationally determined contributions of the 7th Durban Forum on capacity-building and the 2nd meeting of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, which took place at this session.
				96.	The SBI took note that there are emerging capacity gaps, needs and constraints, for example with regard to nationally determined contributions, NAPs, measurement, reporting and verification, access to climate finance, and others as outlined in the synthesis report, and welcomed the intensified efforts being made by Parties and stakeholders to address these issues.
				97.	The SBI also took note of the usefulness and importance of engaging various stakeholders at the subnational, national and regional level in the continued implementation of the capacity-building framework in developing countries.
		B.	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 16(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				98.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2018/3 and Add.1 and FCCC/SBI/2018/5 and the submissions related to the agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Collado and Mr. Kato. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				99.	The SBI welcomed the synthesis reports, prepared by the secretariat to facilitate the regular monitoring and review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries established under decision 2/CP.7 and reaffirmed in decision 29/CMP.1, and the summary report on the 6th Durban Forum on capacity-building.
				100.	The SBI reiterated the value of the objective and scope of capacity-building in developing countries as contained in decision 2/CP.7 and reaffirmed in decision 29/CMP.1, and noted that some progress has been made in the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries at the institutional, systemic and individual level.
				101.	The SBI noted the importance of capacity-building in enhancing the effective implementation of the Kyoto Protocol, and that current and emerging areas in the context of the Kyoto Protocol should also be taken into account in the further implementation of the capacity-building framework in developing countries.
				102.	The SBI recognized the value of the Durban Forum on capacity-building and noted that the Forum serves as a means for a continuous exchange of information, good practices and lessons learned among a wide spectrum of stakeholders under and outside the Kyoto Protocol, as well as for providing input to the monitoring and review of the effectiveness of capacity-building.
				103.	The SBI took note that there are emerging capacity gaps, needs and constraints, as outlined in the synthesis report, and welcomed the intensified efforts being made by Parties and stakeholders to address these issues.
				104.	The SBI also took note of the usefulness and importance of engaging various stakeholders at the subnational, national and regional level in the continued implementation of the capacity-building framework in developing countries.
	XVII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
(Agenda item 17)
		A.	Improved forum and work programme
(Agenda sub-item 17(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				105.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda sub-item. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 48 agenda sub-item 9(a). The SBI also agreed that its Chair and the Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Paul Watkinson (France), would convene the 5th meeting of the improved forum as a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Nataliya Kushko (Ukraine) and Mr. Andrei Marcu (Panama). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				106.	The SBI and the SBSTA convened the 5th meeting of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				107.	The SBI and the SBSTA expressed their gratitude to the experts from both developed and developing countries, as well as from intergovernmental and international organizations, for their technical contribution to the in-forum training workshop convened from 30 April to 1 May 2018 on the use of economic modelling tools related to the areas of the work programme of the improved forum. The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare a report on the workshop for consideration at SBI 49 and SBSTA 49.
				108.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the views expressed by Parties and observers, contained in their submissions, on the scope of the review of the work of the improved forum that will take place at SBI 49 and SBSTA 49.
				109.	The SBI and the SBSTA also took note of the in-forum discussions of Parties on the scope and process of the review of the work of the improved forum, informed by the submissions referred to in paragraph 108 above. The SBI and the SBSTA agreed on the scope of the review as contained in annex II, which serves as the guide for the review of the work of the improved forum.
				110.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal, by 21 September 2018, their views on the work of the improved forum on the basis of the agreed scope of the review as contained in annex II, and requested the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report based on the submissions with a view to informing Parties’ discussions on the review of the work of the improved forum referred to in paragraph 108 above.
				111.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to conduct a one-day review of the work of the improved forum in conjunction with SBI 49 and SBSTA 49 with a view to concluding the review of the work of the improved forum.
				112.	The SBI and the SBSTA noted that the decision on the forum serving the Paris Agreement will be taken at CMA 1.3 as part of the PAWP, at which time the forum will begin serving the Paris Agreement. The SBI and the SBSTA also noted that the outcome of the review of the improved forum, as outlined in decision 11/CP.21, will inform the work programme and modalities for the forum serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement. The SBI and the SBSTA further noted that at SBI 49 and SBSTA 49 Parties will identify new activities to implement the work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures
(Agenda sub-item 17(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				113.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. It had before it an informal document prepared by the SBI and SBSTA Chairs. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 48 agenda sub-item 9(b) and that it would establish a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Kushko and Mr. Marcu. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				114.	The SBI and the SBSTA continued to deliberate, on the basis of the informal document prepared by their Chairs, on the modalities, work programme and functions of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures under the Paris Agreement, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 34, and at the request of SBI 47 and SBSTA 47.
				115.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue work on this matter at SBI 48.2 and SBSTA 48.2 on the basis of the revised version of the SBI and SBSTA Chairs’ informal document as prepared by the co-chairs of the contact group on these agenda sub-items at SBI 48 and SBSTA 48. They noted that the content of the revised SBI and SBSTA Chairs’ informal document does not represent consensus among Parties.
				116.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed that the recommendation being prepared under these agenda sub-items for consideration and adoption at CMA 1 will include language for the CMA to take the necessary procedural steps to enable the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures to serve the Paris Agreement as per decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 33 and 34.
		C.	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 17(c))
		D.	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10
(Agenda sub-item 17(d))
			117.	The SBI considered agenda sub-items 17(c) and (d) at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to the Chair’s proposal that substantive discussions under these sub-items be held in the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures jointly with discussions on agenda sub-item 17(a). At the 3rd meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that no specific conclusions had been reached on the matters. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to continue its consideration of the matters at SBI 49.
	XVIII.	Ways of enhancing the implementation of education, training, public awareness, public participation and public access to information so as to enhance actions under the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 18)
		1.	Proceedings
			118.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations facilitated by Mr. Albert Magalang (Philippines). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			119.	The SBI welcomed the submissions from Parties, observers and other stakeholders on ways of enhancing the implementation of education, training, public awareness, public participation and public access to information (Action for Climate Empowerment ­(ACE)) so as to enhance action under the Paris Agreement. The SBI noted that these submissions helped to shape the agenda and format of the in-session workshop (hereinafter referred to as the ACE workshop) and to develop a list of actions to enhance the implementation of the Paris Agreement through ACE-related activities, as requested at SBI 47.
			120.	The SBI recognized the outcomes of the ACE youth forum, organized on 29 April 2018 under the leadership of the COP 23 Presidency, and expressed its gratitude to the COP 23 Presidency, the Government of Canada, youth NGOs, the United Nations Development Programme and the secretariat for co-organizing the forum.
			121.	The SBI also recognized the outcomes of the ACE workshop and expressed its gratitude to Parties, non-Party stakeholders and observers for their valuable inputs.
			122.	The SBI welcomed the outcomes of the ACE youth forum and the ACE workshop, namely lists of actions to enhance the implementation of the Paris Agreement through ACE-related activities.
			123.	The SBI invited Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal by 10 March 2019 their views on the agenda for the 7th in-session ACE Dialogue.
			124.	The SBI recommended draft conclusions on the process to develop the terms of reference for the review of the Doha work programme on Article 6 of the Convention for consideration and adoption at COP 24.
			125.	The SBI also recommended a draft decision on ways of enhancing the implementation of education, training, public awareness, public participation and public access to information so as to enhance action under the Paris Agreement for consideration and adoption at 
CMA 1.
	XIX.	Gender and climate change
(Agenda item 19)
		126.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda item. It took note of the information provided by the Chair on the in-session workshop on gender and the gender dialogue to be convened during the session, and requested the secretariat to prepare a report on the in-session workshop for consideration at SBI 49 and to prepare a report on the dialogue to be made available on the UNFCCC website.
	XX.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings
(Agenda item 20)
		1.	Proceedings
			127.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2018/7 and the submissions related to the agenda item. At the resumed 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in a contact group chaired by Mr. Deo Saran (Fiji). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below. A representative of one Party made a statement.
		2.	Conclusions
			128.	The SBI took note of the document on arrangements for intergovernmental meetings.
			129.	The SBI also took note with appreciation of the preparations by the secretariat and the Government of Poland for ensuring the success of the United Nations Climate Change Conference to be held in Katowice, Poland, from 3 to 14 December 2018, which will include COP 24, the fourteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) and CMA 1.3 (hereinafter referred to as the conference).
			130.	The SBI invited the Government of Poland to regularly provide additional information regarding the preparations for the conference.
			131.	The SBI emphasized the importance of following the principles of openness, transparency and inclusiveness, and adhering to established procedures on decision-making in making arrangements for the conference.
			132.	The SBI reiterated its appreciation of the successful collaboration between the current Presidency and the incoming Presidency on the preparations for the conference and particularly on jointly leading the Talanoa Dialogue.
			133.	The SBI requested the secretariat to take note of the views expressed by Parties on the possible elements of the provisional agendas for COP 24 and CMP 14. The SBI noted that the agenda for CMA 1.3 was adopted at the first part of its first session.
			134.	The SBI recommended that the high-level segment commence on Tuesday, 11 December, and invited the President Designate of COP 24, CMP 14 and CMA 1.3, in consultation with the secretariat and the Bureau, to finalize the details of the arrangements for the conference, including arrangements for the high-level segment. In this regard, the SBI acknowledged the evolving nature of the negotiations and the need for flexibility in the organization of the conference.
			135.	The SBI agreed to continue to have joint meetings of the supreme bodies during the high-level segment of the conference, and invited the secretariat to make arrangements for the delivery of concise national statements by ministers and other heads of delegation with a recommended time limit of three minutes, and statements by representatives of intergovernmental organizations and NGOs with a recommended time limit of two minutes.
			136.	The SBI took note of the need to ensure effective time management during the conference and requested the presiding officers, with the support of the secretariat, to continue to enhance efforts in this area, noting the improvements made during past sessions. The SBI also noted the desire of Parties to maximize the time available to the three subsidiary bodies to advance their work so as to facilitate the timely conclusion of the work at the conference while providing sufficient time for the COP to forward the outcomes of the PAWP for consideration and adoption at CMA 1.
			137.	The SBI underlined the importance of the conclusion at COP 24 of the political phase of the Talanoa Dialogue, the third high-level ministerial dialogue on climate finance, the high-level event on enhancing climate action and the stocktake on pre-2020 implementation and ambition.
			138.	The SBI noted that, in keeping with the principle of rotation among the regional groups, the President of COP 25 would come from the Latin American and Caribbean States and the President of COP 26 from the Western European and other States. The SBI invited Parties to come forward with offers to host COP 25 and COP 26.
			139.	The SBI recommended the following dates for the sessional periods in 2023, for consideration at COP 24:
				(a)	First sessional period: Monday, 5 June, to Thursday, 15 June;
				(b)	Second sessional period: Monday, 6 November, to Friday, 17 November.
			140.	The SBI took note of the views expressed by Parties at this session on the issue of frequency and location of sessions of the supreme bodies taking place after 2020. The SBI agreed to consider this issue further at SBI 50 to allow Parties to fully take into consideration the outcomes of the PAWP. It invited Parties to submit their views on this issue via the submission portal by 15 March 2019 for consideration at SBI 50. Without prejudice to any outcome, the SBI requested the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on the submissions and an information paper, including on the budgetary and other implications of different proposals contained in the submissions mentioned above, and to make them available before the discussion at SBI 50.
			141.	The SBI recalled its conclusions at SBI 34 and SBI 46 on the effective engagement of non-Party stakeholders and requested the secretariat to continue reporting biennially on this subject, taking into account all relevant SBI conclusions. The SBI took note of the update provided by the secretariat for 2016–2017 based on SBI conclusions and the views of Parties and non-Party stakeholders on this subject.
			142.	The SBI reiterated the importance of enhancing the engagement of non-Party stakeholders in the intergovernmental process and took note of the diverse views expressed by Parties regarding their engagement. In this regard, the SBI invited Parties and non-Party stakeholders to continue to identify at SBI 50 opportunities and improved practices to further enhance the openness, transparency, inclusiveness and balance of the effective engagement of non-Party stakeholders in a manner that enhances the implementation of the Convention.
			143.	In this regard, the SBI acknowledged the new submission portal developed by the secretariat, which enables observer organizations to submit their views online, and also acknowledged the success of the first open dialogue held under the Presidency of COP 23. The SBI encouraged future Presidencies, supported by the secretariat as appropriate, to continue organizing and facilitating an open dialogue among Parties and observer organizations, while implementing its conclusions from SBI 46.
			144.	The SBI took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 140 and 141 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	XXI.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
(Agenda item 21)
		A.	Continuous review of the functions and operations of the secretariat
(Agenda sub-item 21(a))
			145.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting. The Chair invited the UNFCCC Deputy Executive Secretary to introduce the sub-item. A statement was made on behalf of the African Group. The SBI agreed to take note of the information provided and requested the secretariat to provide an update on this work for consideration at SBI 49.
		B.	Budgetary matters
(Agenda sub-item 21(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				146.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2018/2, FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.2, FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.3, FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.4 and Add.1 and FCCC/SBI/2018/INF.6. A representative of one Party made a statement. At the resumed 1st meeting of the SBI, the Chair invited the Deputy Executive Secretary to introduce the sub-item. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in a contact group chaired by Mr. Amena Yauvoli (Fiji). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				147.	The SBI took note of the information relating to the status of contributions as at 13 April 2018. The SBI expressed its appreciation to the Parties that had paid their indicative contributions to the core budget and their fees for the international transaction log on time.
				148.	The SBI expressed concern regarding the high level of outstanding contributions to the core budget for the current and previous bienniums and strongly urged the Parties concerned to make their contributions without further delay. It requested the Executive Secretary to raise awareness among Party representatives in bilateral and multilateral forums of the issue of outstanding core budget contributions. The SBI noted the need to continue exploring options for enhancing the level of contributions at SBI 49. It urged coordinators of negotiating groups to help raise awareness of the high level of outstanding contributions and to encourage Parties to make payments of their outstanding contributions.
				149.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to the Parties that had made voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process and the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities. It urged Parties to contribute to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process to ensure the widest possible participation in 2018, and to contribute to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities to ensure a high level of implementation of the UNFCCC work programme.
				150.	The SBI reiterated its appreciation to the Government of Germany for its annual voluntary contribution to the core budget of EUR 766,938 and its special contribution of EUR 1,789,522 as Host Government of the secretariat.
				151.	The SBI took note of the 2017 annual report and noted that while the annual report attempted to respond to the mandate contained in decision 21/CP.23, paragraph 18, future reports require enhancements, to be considered at SBI 49.
				152.	It also took note of the information contained in the report on the technical workshop that took place in Bonn on 8 November 2017 on ways to increase the efficiency and transparency of the budget process.
				153.	The SBI further took note of the information contained in the note by the secretariat on possible approaches to prioritization and on the budgetary implications of decisions of the governing bodies and conclusions of the subsidiary bodies.
				154.	The SBI took note of the information contained in the note by the secretariat on possible enhancements to the presentation of the budget and work programme for the biennium 2020–2021.
				155.	The SBI requested the secretariat to update the documents referred to in paragraphs 152–154 above, taking into account the comments made by Parties at this session, for consideration at SBI 49.
				156.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of ways to enhance the transparency and efficiency of the budget process at SBI 49.
	XXII.	Other matters
(Agenda item 22)
		157.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting. A representative of one Party made a statement.
	XXIII.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 23)
		1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
			158.	At the 3rd meeting of the SBI, the Deputy Executive Secretary provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during this session, in accordance with the provisions of rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
			159.	He informed Parties that the SBI had not made a request at this session with budgetary implications over and above the core budget for the biennium 2018–2019. The estimated cost of activities requested by the SBI under two agenda items will be covered by existing core budget resources, including EUR 30,000 under agenda item 10, “Koronivia joint work on agriculture”, for six workshop reports, and EUR 20,000 under agenda item 20, “Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings”, to prepare a synthesis report and an information paper.
			160.	He also informed the SBI that, pursuant to paragraphs 5–9 of decision 1/CP.23, the COP 23 President, in consultation with the COP Bureau and the Co-Chairs of the APA, had assessed the need for an additional negotiating session to facilitate the timely completion of the work under the PAWP and that it had been decided that the session will be held in Bangkok in September 2018. The total estimated cost of the additional session amounts to EUR 2.6 million. While most of the participation cost for the session is covered, a total of EUR 1.5 million is still required under the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities to cover the logistical arrangements for the session.
			161.	The Deputy Executive Secretary took the opportunity to inform Parties that, with regard to COP 24, an amount of EUR 2.2 million has yet to be secured under the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process to enable the participation of representatives of eligible Parties.
			162.	He noted that these amounts were preliminary and based on the information available at that time. He expressed the hope that the secretariat can count on the continued generosity of Parties to provide additional funding in a timely and predictable manner. He also noted that without supplementary contributions the secretariat will not be in a position to make the required arrangements.
		2.	Closure of and report on the session
			163.	At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the draft report on the first part of the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session and to make it available to all Parties.
			164.	At its 4th meeting, which was held jointly with the 4th meeting of the SBSTA and the 15th meeting of the APA, the SBI heard statements from Parties and observers. Statements were made by representatives of 19 Parties, including 14 on behalf of groups of Parties, namely: the African Group; AOSIS; the Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; the Coalition for Rainforest Nations; the Environmental Integrity Group; the European Union and its member States; the G77 and China; the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; the LDCs; the LMDCs; and the Umbrella Group. Statements were also made on behalf of environmental NGOs, indigenous peoples organizations, local government and municipal authorities, research and independent NGOs, women and gender NGOs and youth NGOs.
			165.	At the end of the joint plenary, following the determination that an additional negotiating session is needed (see para. 160 above), SBI 48 was suspended. It will be resumed in Bangkok in conjunction with the resumed sessions of the SBSTA and the APA to address matters relating to the PAWP in accordance with annex I to decision 1/CP.23.
			
Annex I
Koronivia road map
	| Session | Activity |
	| SBSTA/SBI 48 April–May 2018 | Parties agree on the road map/agenda |
	|  | Intersessional 
activities | Submissions on topic 2(a)a (Modalities for implementation of the outcomes of the five in-session workshops on issues related to agriculture and other future topics that may arise from this work) by 22 October 2018 |
	| SBSTA/SBI 49 December 2018 | Workshop with constituted bodies under the Conventionb on topic 2(a) (Modalities for implementation of the outcomes of the five in-session workshops on issues related to agriculture and other future topics that may arise from this work) |
	|  | Intersessional 
activities | Preparation of workshop report by the secretariat on topic 2(a) (Modalities for implementation of the outcomes of the five in-session workshops on issues related to agriculture and other future topics that may arise from this work) Submissions on topics 2(b) (Methods and approaches for assessing adaptation, adaptation co-benefits and resilience) and 2(c) (Improved soil carbon, soil health and soil fertility under grassland and cropland as well as integrated systems, including water management) by 6 May 2019 |
	| SBSTA/SBI 50 
June 2019 | Workshops on topics 2(b) (Methods and approaches for assessing adaptation, adaptation co-benefits and resilience) and 2(c) (Improved soil carbon, soil health and soil fertility under grassland and cropland as well as integrated systems, including water management) |
	|  | Consideration of the workshop report on topic 2(a) (Modalities for implementation of the outcomes of the five in-session workshops on issues related to agriculture and other future topics that may arise from this work) |
	|  | Intersessional 
activities | Preparation of workshop reports by the secretariat on topics 2(b) (Methods and approaches for assessing adaptation, adaptation co-benefits and resilience) and 2(c) (Improved soil carbon, soil health and soil fertility under grassland and cropland as well as integrated systems, including water management) Submissions on topic 2(d) (Improved nutrient use and manure management towards sustainable and resilient agricultural systems) by 30 September 2019 |
	| SBSTA/SBI 51
November 2019 | Workshop on topic 2(d) (Improved nutrient use and manure management towards sustainable and resilient agricultural systems) Consideration of the workshop reports on topics 2(b) (Methods and approaches for assessing adaptation, adaptation co-benefits and resilience) and 2(c) (Improved soil carbon, soil health and soil fertility under grassland and cropland as well as integrated systems, including water management) |
	|  | Intersessional 
activities | Preparation of workshop report by the secretariat on topic 2(d) (Improved nutrient use and manure management towards sustainable and resilient agricultural systems)  Submissions on topics 2(e) (Improved livestock management systems, including agropastoral production systems and others) and 2(f) (Socioeconomic and food security dimensions of climate change in the agricultural sector) by 20 April 2020 |
	| SBSTA/SBI 52
June 2020 | Workshops on topics 2(e) (Improved livestock management systems, including agropastoral production systems and others) and 2(f) (Socioeconomic and food security dimensions of climate change in the agricultural sector) Consideration of the workshop report on topic 2(d) (Improved nutrient use and manure management towards sustainable and resilient agricultural systems) |
	|  | Intersessional 
activities | Preparation of workshop reports by the secretariat on topics 2(e) (Improved livestock management systems, including agropastoral production systems and others) and 2(f) (Socioeconomic and food security dimensions of climate change in the agricultural sector) Submissions on future topics not listed in decision 4/CP.23 and views on the progress of the Koronivia joint work on agriculture in order to report to the Conference of the Parties as per decision 4/CP.23, paragraph 4, by 28 September 2020 |
	| SBSTA/SBI 53
November 2020 | Consideration of the workshop reports on topics 2(e) (Improved livestock management systems, including agropastoral production systems and others) and 2(f) (Socioeconomic and food security dimensions of climate change in the agricultural sector) Report to the Conference of the Parties on the progress and outcomes of the work, including on potential future topics |
	| Abbreviations: SBI = Subsidiary Body for Implementation, SBSTA = Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice. a   Topic numbering refers to the paragraphs in decision 4/CP.23. b   Constituted bodies will contribute to the Koronivia joint work on agriculture in accordance with decision 4/CP.23, paragraph 1. |
	
		
	
Annex II
	Scope of the review of the work of the improved forum
		I.	Guiding questions on the work programme of the improved forum
			1.	How has the forum’s work programme in the areas of economic diversification and transformation and just transition of the workforce, and the creation of decent work and quality jobs supported the functions and objectives of the forum as outlined in decision 11/CP.21?
			2.	To what extent has the work programme been effective in providing a platform allowing Parties to share, in an interactive manner, information, experiences, case studies, best practices and views, and to facilitate assessment and analysis of the impact of the implementation of response measures, on the positive and negative impacts and on ways to maximize the positive and minimize the negative impacts, with a view to recommending specific actions?
			3.	To what extent has the work programme been effective in focusing the work under the improved forum on providing concrete examples, case studies and practices in order to enhance the capacity of Parties, in particular developing country Parties, to deal with the impact of implementing response measures?
			4.	To what extent has the work programme been effective in addressing the needs of all Parties, in particular developing country Parties, informed by, inter alia, the assessment and analysis of impacts, including the use and development of economic modelling, taking into account all relevant policy issues of concern?
			5.	To what extent has the implementation of the forum’s work programme facilitated the provision of recommendations to the subsidiary bodies on specific actions for their consideration, with a view to recommending those actions, as appropriate, to the Conference of Parties, beginning at its twenty-third session?
		II.	Guiding questions on the modalities of operation of the improved forum
			6.	How effective have the forum’s modalities been in supporting the forum’s functions and work programme?
				(a)	Technical papers;
				(b)	Submissions from Parties and organizations;
				(c)	Interactions with external experts and relevant institutions and organizations;
				(d)	Workshops;
				(e)	The ad hoc technical expert group;
				(f)	In-forum discussions as contact group;
				(g)	Review of the work of the improved forum every three years.
			
			
			
