| None | United Nations |  | FCCC/SBI/2019/20 |
| None |  | Distr.: General 16 March 2020   Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Implementation
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its fifty-first session, held in Madrid from 2 to 9 December 2019
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
	Abbreviations and acronyms		4
	I.	Opening of the session 
		(Agenda item 1)		1–2	5
		II.	Organizational matters 
(Agenda item 2)		3–11	5
	A.	Adoption of the agenda		3–4	5
	B.	Organization of the work of the session		5–6	7
	C.	Election of officers other than the Chair		7	7
	D.	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international
 			assessment and review process		8	7
	E.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation
			and analysis process	 	9–10	7
	F.	Other mandated events		11	8
		III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda item 3)		12	8
		A.	Status of submission and review of seventh national communications and
			third biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention 			8
		B.	Compilations and syntheses of second and third biennial reports from Parties
 			included in Annex I to the Convention  			8
			C.	Reports on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included 
in Annex I to the Convention for the periods 1990–2016 and 1990–2017		12	8
	IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention 
 		(Agenda item 4)		13–20	9
		A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included
 		in Annex I to the Convention (held in abeyance)			9
	B.	Report and terms of reference of the Consultative Group of Experts  		13–18	9
	C.	Provision of financial and technical support		19	10
		D.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of 
 		Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention 		20	10
			V.	Common time frames for nationally determined contributions referred to in 
Article 4, paragraph 10, of the Paris Agreement (Agenda item 5)		21	11
	VI.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol 
 		(Agenda item 6)		22–23	11
		A.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development 
mechanism		22	11
		B.	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under 
the Kyoto Protocol		23	11
		VII.	Scope of the next periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention
 and of overall progress towards achieving it (Agenda item 7)		24	11
	VIII.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture (Agenda item 8)		25–36	12
		IX.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for 
Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts and the 2019 review 
of the Mechanism (Agenda item 9)		37	13
	X.	Report of the Adaptation Committee (Agenda item 10)		38	14
	XI.	Matters relating to the least developed countries (Agenda item 11)		39–54	14
	XII.	National adaptation plans (Agenda item 12)		55	15
	XIII.	Development and transfer of technologies (Agenda item 13)		56–73	16
		A.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate 
Technology Centre and Network		56	16
		B.	Alignment between processes pertaining to the review of the Climate 
Technology Centre and Network and the periodic assessment referred to 
in paragraph 69 of decision 1/CP.21		57–62	16
	C.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer 		63–73	17
	XIV.	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund: membership of the Adaptation Fund Board 
 		(Agenda item 14)		74	18
	XV.	Matters relating to capacity-building for developing countries 
 		(Agenda item 15)		75	18
	A.	Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building		18
		B.	Matters relating to capacity-building under the Convention, including 
enhancing institutional arrangements and the review of the Paris Committee 
on Capacity-building		75	18
		XVI.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response 
measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement 
 (Agenda item 16)		76–79	19
	XVII.	Gender and climate change (Agenda item 17)		80	20
	XVIII.	Report on activities related to Action for Climate Empowerment 
 		(Agenda item 18)		81	20
	XIX.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters (Agenda item 19)		82–85	20
	A.	Audit report and financial statements for 2018 			20
	B.	Budget performance for the biennium 2018–2019 			20
	C.	Other budgetary matters		82–85	20
	XX.	Other matters (Agenda item 20)		86	21
	XXI.	Closure of and report on the session (Agenda item 21)		87–91	21
		
	
Addendum – FCCC/SBI/2019/20/Add.1
Summary reports on multilateral assessments at the fifty-first session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation

	Abbreviations and acronyms
		| CGE | Consultative Group of Experts |
		| CMA | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement |
		| CMP | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol |
		| COP | Conference of the Parties |
		| CTC | Climate Technology Centre |
		| CTCN | Climate Technology Centre and Network |
		| FSV | facilitative sharing of views |
		| GCF | Green Climate Fund |
		| GEF | Global Environment Facility |
		| ICA | international consultation and analysis |
		| KCI | Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures |
		| LDC | least developed country |
		| LEG | Least Developed Countries Expert Group |
		| NAP | national adaptation plan |
		| NGO | non-governmental organization |
		| SB | sessions of the subsidiary bodies |
		| SBI | Subsidiary Body for Implementation |
		| SBSTA | Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice |
		| SIDS | small island developing State(s) |
		| TEC | Technology Executive Committee |
		| TNA | technology needs assessment |
		
		
		I.	Opening of the session
(Agenda item 1)
			1.	SBI 51 was held at IFEMA – Feria de Madrid in Madrid, Spain, from 2 to 9 December 2019.
			2.	The Chair of the SBI, Emmanuel Dumisani Dlamini (Eswatini), opened the session on Monday, 2 December, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Naser Moghaddasi (Islamic Republic of Iran) as Vice-Chair, Yeonchul Yoo (Republic of Korea) as additional Vice-Chair, Aysin Turpanci (Turkey) as Rapporteur and Constantinos Cartalis (Greece) as additional Rapporteur of the SBI.
		II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
			A.	Adoption of the agenda
				(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
					3.	At its 1st meeting, on 2 December, the SBI considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBI/2019/10).
					4.	The SBI adopted the agenda as follows, with sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance:
						1.	Opening of the session.
						2.	Organizational matters:
							(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
							(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
							(c)	Election of officers other than the Chair;
							(d)	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process;
							(e)	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process;
							(f)	Other mandated events.
						3.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention:
							(a)	Status of submission and review of seventh national communications and third biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
							(b)	Compilations and syntheses of second and third biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
							(c)	Reports on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention for the periods 1990–2016 and 1990–2017.
						4.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention:
							(a)	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention;
							(b)	Report and terms of reference of the Consultative Group of Experts;
							(c)	Provision of financial and technical support;
							(d)	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention.
						5.	Common time frames for nationally determined contributions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 10, of the Paris Agreement.
						6.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol:
							(a)	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism;
							(b)	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol.
						7.	Scope of the next periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it.*
						8.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture.*
						9.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts and the 2019 review of the Mechanism.*
						10.	Report of the Adaptation Committee.*
						11.	Matters relating to the least developed countries.
						12.	National adaptation plans.
						13.	Development and transfer of technologies:
							(a)	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network;*
							(b)	Alignment between processes pertaining to the review of the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the periodic assessment referred to in paragraph 69 of decision 1/CP.21;
							(c)	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer.
						14.	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund: membership of the Adaptation Fund Board.
						15.	Matters relating to capacity-building for developing countries:
							(a)	Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building;
							(b)	Matters relating to capacity-building under the Convention, including enhancing institutional arrangements and the review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building.
						16.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement.*
						17.	Gender and climate change.
						18.	Report on activities related to Action for Climate Empowerment.
						19.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters:
							(a)	Audit report and financial statements for 2018;
							(b)	Budget performance for the biennium 2018–2019;
							(c)	Other budgetary matters.
						20.	Other matters.
						21.	Closure of and report on the session.
			B.	Organization of the work of the session
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
				5.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. The Chair drew attention to the deadline for all groups to conclude their work by 1 p.m. on Saturday, 7 December, to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary, which was to be convened on Monday, 9 December. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to proceed on that basis and in line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
				6.	At the 2nd meeting of the SBI, on 2 December, which was held jointly with the 2nd meeting of COP 25, the 2nd meeting of CMP 15, the 2nd meeting of CMA 2 and the 2nd meeting of SBSTA 51, statements were made by representatives of 14 Parties on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; Coalition for Rainforest Nations; Environmental Integrity Group; European Union and its member States; Group of 77 and China; Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; LDCs; Like-minded Developing Countries; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of business and industry NGOs, environmental NGOs, indigenous peoples organizations, local government and municipal authorities, research and independent NGOs, trade union NGOs, the women and gender constituency and youth NGOs.
			C.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
				7.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting, on 3 December. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled that the SBI was expected to elect its Vice-Chair. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI elected Mr. Yoo as its Vice-Chair.
			D.	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process
(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
				8.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided by its Chair on the organization of the multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process that was to take place on 7 and 9 December. Representatives of seven Parties made statements. A summary report on the multilateral assessment of the 10 Parties included in Annex I to the Convention assessed at the session is contained in the addendum to this report.
			E.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process
(Agenda sub-item 2(e))
				9.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided by its Chair on the organization of the workshop for FSV under the ICA process that was to take place on 9 December.
				10.	The Chair drew attention to the ICA modalities and guidelines as well as to the FSV web pages. He informed the SBI that the output of the ICA process will include, for each of the five Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention participating in the above-mentioned FSV workshop, a record of the proceedings of the FSV session and a summary report as the outcome of the technical analysis of the Party’s biennial update report (see para. 20 below).
			F.	Other mandated events
(Agenda sub-item 2(f))
				11.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided on the other mandated events being held at the session.
		III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 3)
			A.	Status of submission and review of seventh national communications and third biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(a))
			B.	Compilations and syntheses of second and third biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(b))
			C.	Reports on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention for the periods 1990–2016 and 1990–2017
(Agenda sub-item 3(c))
				12.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that its Chair would hold consultations with interested Parties on the matters. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of the matters at SBI 52 (June 2020). Representatives of four Parties made statements, including one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and one on behalf of the African Group.
		IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 4)
			A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance)
			B.	Report and terms of reference of the Consultative Group of Experts 
(Agenda sub-item 4(b))
				1.	Proceedings
					13.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. The Chair of the CGE, Gervais Ludovic Itsoua Madzous (Congo), made a statement. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Sin Liang Cheah (Singapore) and Gertraud Wollansky (Austria). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below. The representative of one Party made a statement on behalf of the African Group.
				2.	Conclusions
					14.	The SBI noted the annual progress report on the work of the CGE and the documents capturing the outcomes of key activities of the CGE in 2019.
					15.	The SBI took note of the achievements of the CGE in implementing its workplan for 2019, particularly:
						(a)	Training 106 national experts through three regional hands-on training workshops and pre-workshop webinars on the institutionalization of data management for national greenhouse gas inventories;
						(b)	Continuing to offer the training programme on the technical analysis of biennial update reports to experts on the UNFCCC roster of experts;
						(c)	Developing and disseminating the Technical handbook for developing country Parties on preparing for implementation of the enhanced transparency framework under the Paris Agreement,,  parts of the toolbox on institutional arrangements to support the measurement, reporting and verification and the enhanced transparency framework of climate action and support for developing country Parties, and the e-learning programme on national communications;
						(d)	Organizing two pilot informal forums on supporting the existing measurement, reporting and verification arrangements and preparing for the enhanced transparency framework, which provided an informal space for key actors and other stakeholders to engage in an implementation-focused exchange with a view to addressing countries’ technical assistance needs;
						(e)	Undertaking targeted analytical work, such as compiling and summarizing problems, constraints, lessons learned and capacity-building needs in relation to developing country Parties’ reporting.
					16.	The SBI expressed its gratitude to the Governments of Algeria, Belize and Cambodia for hosting the regional hands-on training workshops referred to in paragraph 15(a) above.
					17.	The SBI extended its appreciation to the Parties that provided financial contributions to support the work of the CGE in 2019.
					18.	The SBI continued, but did not conclude, its consideration of the review and revision of the terms of reference of the CGE. The SBI agreed to forward the matter to COP 25 for further guidance taking into account the text contained in the informal note by the co-facilitators for this agenda sub-item, available on the UNFCCC website.
			C.	Provision of financial and technical support
(Agenda sub-item 4(c))
				19.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited a representative of the GEF to make a statement. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Cheah and Ms. Wollansky. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of the matter at SBI 52. The representative of one Party made a statement on behalf of the African Group.
			D.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 4(d))
				20.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the summary reports that had been published on the UNFCCC website by 30 September 2019.
		V.	Common time frames for nationally determined contributions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 10, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 5)
			21.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Gregoire Baribeau (Canada) and George Wamukoya (Kenya). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI noted that Parties had not been able to agree on conclusions. In accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBI 52. The representative of one Party made a statement.
		VI.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda item 6)
			A.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism
(Agenda sub-item 6(a))
				22.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to defer consideration of the matter to SBI 52.
			B.	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 6(b))
				23.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2019/INF.14.
		VII.	Scope of the next periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it
(Agenda item 7)
			24.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 51 agenda sub-item 7(a) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Leon Charles (Grenada) and Madoka Yoshino (Japan). At their 3rd meetings, having completed their consideration of the scope of the next periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it taking into account the provisions related to the periodic review in decisions 1/CP.16, paragraph 4, and 1/CP.18, paragraph 79; decision 19/CMA.1, on the global stocktake; decision 1/CP.24, section V, on the Talanoa Dialogue; and the ongoing technical examination processes, the SBI and the SBSTA recommended a draft decision for further consideration and adoption at COP 25. Representatives of two Parties made statements, including one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
		VIII.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture
(Agenda item 8)
			1.	Proceedings
				25.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SB/2019/1 and FCCC/SB/2019/2 and the submissions related to the item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 51 agenda item 6 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Monika Figaj (Poland) and Milagros Sandoval (Peru). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below. Representatives of two Parties made statements, including one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
			2.	Conclusions
				26.	The SBI and the SBSTA continued their joint work on addressing issues related to agriculture.
				27.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the reports on the two Koronivia road map workshops on topics 2(b) (Methods and approaches for assessing adaptation, adaptation co-benefits and resilience) and 2(c) (Improved soil carbon, soil health and soil fertility under grassland and cropland as well as integrated systems, including water management) held at SB 50.
				28.	Having considered the workshop report on topic 2(b), the SBI and the SBSTA recognized that various tools are available for assessing and monitoring adaptation and its co-benefits, but existing tools could benefit from further adjustment and new tools could be developed for country-specific circumstances, while taking into consideration the importance of sharing best practices among countries and other stakeholders and the important role of science, technology and capacity-building in facilitating data collection and adaptation assessment.
				29.	Having considered the workshop report on topic 2(c), the SBI and the SBSTA also recognized that issues relating to soil carbon, soil health and soil fertility as well as sustainable soil and integrated water management are context-specific and, taking into account countries’ circumstances, should be dealt with in a holistic and inclusive manner to realize the full potential of increased productivity in contributing to food security, adaptation and adaptation co-benefits as well as enhancing carbon sinks.
				30.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties to consider relevant policies, actions and measures, including national plans and strategies, that would help with implementing the activities referred to in paragraphs 28–29 above.
				31.	The SBI and the SBSTA encouraged the continued involvement of constituted bodies and financing entities in the Koronivia joint work on agriculture, highlighting the potential of creating interlinkages that lead to enhanced action and improvements in implementation.
				32.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the Koronivia road map workshop on topic 2(d) (Improved nutrient use and manure management towards sustainable and resilient agricultural systems) held at these sessions, and looked forward to considering the report on the workshop at SB 52 (June 2020). They also welcomed the submissions from Parties and observers that served as input to the workshop.
				33.	The SBI and the SBSTA further welcomed the participation in the workshops of observers and representatives of the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism (the GEF and the GCF), the Adaptation Fund, the GEF-administered Least Developed Countries Fund and Special Climate Change Fund, and the constituted bodies under the Convention. They noted with appreciation the work already undertaken on issues related to agriculture by those entities, and recalled inviting them to contribute to the work and participate in the workshops set out in the Koronivia road map.
				34.	The SBI and the SBSTA recalled their request to the secretariat to organize, in addition to the workshops mandated in the Koronivia road map, and subject to the availability of supplementary funds, an intersessional workshop between SB 51 and 52, and to prepare a report on the workshop for consideration at SB 52. They welcomed with appreciation the financial contribution of the Government of New Zealand to the workshop, to be held in Bonn in March 2020.
				35.	The SBI and the SBSTA also recalled their invitation to Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal by 20 April 2020 their views on topics 2(e) (Improved livestock management systems) and 2(f) (Socioeconomic and food security dimensions of climate change in the agricultural sector) of the Koronivia road map, on which workshops will be held in conjunction with SB 52.
				36.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SB 52.
		IX.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts and the 2019 review of the Mechanism
(Agenda item 9)
			37.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2019/5 and Add.1 and the submissions related to the item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 51 agenda item 4 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Marianne Karlsen (Norway) and Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago). At their 3rd meetings, having considered the annual report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts and undertaken the 2019 review of the Warsaw International Mechanism on the basis of the terms of reference for the review, the SBI and the SBSTA recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption by the appropriate body or bodies. A representative of one Party made a statement on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
		X.	Report of the Adaptation Committee
(Agenda item 10)
			38.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2019/3. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Maria del Pilar Bueno, Co-Chair of the Adaptation Committee, to deliver a brief oral report on the work of the Adaptation Committee. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 51 agenda item 3 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Annela Anger-Kraavi (Estonia) and Pepetua Latasi (Tuvalu). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI noted that Parties had not been able to agree on conclusions. In accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBI 52. Representatives of two Parties made statements, including one on behalf of the African Group.
		XI.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
(Agenda item 11)
			1.	Proceedings
				39.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2019/16. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Hana Hamadalla Mohamed (Sudan), Chair of the LEG, to deliver a brief oral report on the work of the LEG. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Latasi and Malcolm Ridout (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland). A representative of one Party made a statement. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				40.	The SBI welcomed the report on the 36th meeting of the LEG, held in Nairobi, Kenya, from 27 to 30 August 2019.
				41.	The SBI also welcomed the successful conduct of the training workshop on NAPs held in Nairobi from 2 to 6 September 2019 for the LDCs in the early stages of the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
				42.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to the Government of Kenya and the United Nations Environment Programme for hosting the aforementioned meeting and workshop, respectively.
				43.	The SBI expressed its gratitude to the LEG and the secretariat for their work in supporting the LDCs and for continuing to coordinate support activities with relevant organizations.
				44.	The SBI took note of the ongoing preparations for the NAP Expo scheduled to take place from 30 March to 3 April 2020 in Gaborone, Botswana, and invited Parties and relevant organizations to participate in, and assist the LEG in organizing, the event.
				45.	The SBI noted that, as at 3 December 2019, 4 of the 17 NAPs submitted by developing countries were from the LDCs.
				46.	The SBI also noted that, as at 3 December 2019, 16 of the 83 proposals received from developing countries for accessing funding from the GCF Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme for the formulation of NAPs that had been, or were in the process of being, approved by the GCF secretariat were from the LDCs.
				47.	The SBI further noted that, as at 3 December 2019, 29 of the 83 proposals referred to in paragraph 46 above had received funds from the GCF, and that 10 of those were from the LDCs.
				48.	The SBI noted with appreciation the financial pledges, totalling USD 160 million, made at the United Nations Climate Action Summit 2019 by the Governments of Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands and Sweden, the financial pledge of 7.5 million Canadian dollars made by the Government of Canada at the 2019 G7 Summit, and the financial pledge of USD 16.6 million made by the Government of Belgium to the Least Developed Countries Fund, and urged additional contributions to the Fund.
				49.	The SBI also noted with appreciation the ongoing collaboration of the LEG with the Adaptation Committee, other constituted bodies under the Convention, partners of the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change and a wide range of organizations, agencies and regional centres and networks, and encouraged the continuation of this collaboration.
				50.	The SBI requested the LEG to consider how to increase the accessibility and transparency of its meetings and information on its workplan activities, taking into account the rules of procedure and practices of other constituted bodies, as appropriate, and to include information on how it responded to this mandate in the report on its 37th meeting for consideration at SBI 52.
				51.	The SBI welcomed the work of the LEG as part of the Open NAPs initiative for the LDCs in the early stages of the process to formulate and implement NAPs, and invited Parties and relevant organizations to support that initiative with a view to helping those LDCs to formulate and implement NAPs.
				52.	The SBI noted the progress of the GCF in enhancing the process of accessing support for the formulation and implementation of NAPs, and expressed its appreciation to the Adaptation Committee and the LEG for their engagement with the GCF in this regard.
				53.	The SBI noted the challenges and complexities experienced by the LDCs in accessing funding from the GCF Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme for the formulation of NAPs, particularly in relation to the application and review of proposals for funding.
				54.	The SBI invited delivery partners of the GCF Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme for the formulation of NAPs to strengthen efforts to support the LDCs with the goal of expediting the submission of readiness proposals to the GCF.
		XII.	National adaptation plans
(Agenda item 12)
			55.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2019/INF.15, FCCC/SBI/2019/16, FCCC/SB/2019/3, FCCC/CP/2019/3 and Add.1, and FCCC/CP/2019/5. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Latasi and Mr. Ridout. At its 3rd meeting, having welcomed the document on progress in the process to formulate and implement NAPs and taken note of the other aforementioned documents prepared for the session, the SBI recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 25.
		XIII.	Development and transfer of technologies
(Agenda item 13)
			A.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network
(Agenda sub-item 13(a))
				56.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2019/4. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Dinara Gershinkova (Russian Federation), Chair of the TEC, and Orly Jacob (Canada), Chair of the Advisory Board of the CTCN, to deliver brief oral reports on the work of those bodies. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed that the sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 51 agenda item 5 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Stella Gama (Malawi) and Steven Turnbull (Australia). At their 3rd meetings, the SBI and the SBSTA recommended draft decisions for consideration and adoption at COP 25 and CMA 2. The representative of one Party made a statement on behalf of the African Group.
			B.	Alignment between processes pertaining to the review of the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the periodic assessment referred to in paragraph 69 of decision 1/CP.21
(Agenda sub-item 13(b))
				1.	Proceedings
					57.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Karsten Krause (Germany) and Spencer Thomas (Grenada). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					58.	The SBI initiated its consideration of the alignment between processes pertaining to the review of the CTCN and the periodic assessment of the effectiveness and adequacy of the support provided to the Technology Mechanism in supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement on matters relating to technology development and transfer (hereinafter referred to as the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism).
					59.	The SBI noted the importance of the effectiveness, efficiency and complementarity of the processes in considering the alignment between the independent review of the CTCN and the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism.
					60.	The SBI acknowledged the need to take into account, in considering such alignment, information on, inter alia:
						(a)	The process for undertaking the independent review of the CTCN in accordance with decision 2/CP.17, annex VII, paragraph 20, including the areas of evaluation, the methodology used, and the scope, purpose, objective, impact and lessons learned;
						(b)	The scope of and modalities for the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism in accordance with decision 16/CMA.1;
						(c)	The term of agreement to host the CTC and the process for renewing the agreement in accordance with decision 2/CP.17, annex VII, paragraphs 21–22;
						(d)	The memorandum of understanding between the COP and the United Nations Environment Programme regarding the hosting of the CTC, adopted by decision 14/CP.18;
						(e)	The review of the functions of the CTC and the decision of COP 32 (2026) on whether to extend its term, as mandated in decision 2/CP.17, annex VII, paragraph 23.
					61.	The SBI considered the concept of alignment, the timelines for the independent review of the CTCN and the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism, and possible options, and their implications, for aligning processes pertaining to the independent review of the CTCN and the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism, and agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 52.
					62.	The SBI requested the secretariat to prepare an information note on possible options, and their implications, for aligning processes pertaining to the independent review of the CTCN and the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism for consideration at 
SBI 52.
			C.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer
(Agenda sub-item 13(c))
				1.	Proceedings
					63.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SB/2019/4 and FCCC/CP/2019/5. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mareer Mohamed Husny (Maldives) and Elfriede More (Austria). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					64.	The SBI welcomed the information on progress in the implementation of the Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer contained in the report of the GEF to COP 25 and noted the related challenges and lessons learned.
					65.	The SBI also welcomed the continued support provided by the GEF for technology development and transfer on approval by the GEF Council of 8 proposed projects with technology transfer elements for climate change mitigation and 18 proposed projects for adaptation during the GEF reporting period.
					66.	The SBI further welcomed the approval by the GEF Council of the fourth phase of the global project on TNAs, whereby support is being provided to 15 LDCs and SIDS for conducting or updating their TNAs. The SBI noted that some LDCs and SIDS have not been included in the fourth phase of the project.
					67.	The SBI noted the importance of implementing the technology action plans resulting from the TNA process, and encouraged Parties to consider using the System for Transparent Allocation of Resources for implementing the outcomes of TNAs and technology action plans.
					68.	The SBI noted and considered the progress, challenges and lessons learned in relation to the global CTCN project supported by the GEF.
					69.	The SBI welcomed the ongoing collaboration between the CTCN and the pilot regional climate technology and finance centres supported by the GEF, and encouraged the CTCN to consult with the GEF and relevant multilateral development banks to find ways to harness the lessons learned in a manner that benefits future projects.
					70.	The SBI welcomed the information provided by the TEC and the CTCN in their joint annual report for 2019 on how they will address the key messages and relevant recommendations contained in the TEC report on the updated evaluation of the Poznan strategic programme.
					71.	The SBI invited the TEC and the CTCN to include in their joint annual report for 2020 information on the outcomes of their actions in response to the relevant recommendations in the evaluation report referred to in paragraph 70 above.
					72.	The SBI recommended that the COP invite the GEF to consider:
						(a)	Exploring ways to include in the fourth phase of the global project on TNAs the LDCs and SIDS that have never undertaken a TNA and have not been included in the phase;
						(b)	Relevant recommendations contained in the evaluation report referred to in paragraph 70 above, within the scope of its mandate and its operational modalities.
					73.	The SBI invited other relevant stakeholders, including the regional development banks, to consider the relevant recommendations contained in the evaluation report referred to in paragraph 70 above.
		XIV.	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund: membership of the Adaptation Fund Board
(Agenda item 14)
			74.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Amjad Abdulla (Maldives) and Fiona Gilbert (Australia). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of the matter at SBI 52.
		XV.	Matters relating to capacity-building for developing countries
(Agenda item 15)
			A.	Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building
(Agenda sub-item 15(a))
			B.	Matters relating to capacity-building under the Convention, including enhancing institutional arrangements and the review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building
(Agenda sub-item 15(b))
				75.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2019/11, FCCC/SBI/2019/13, FCCC/SBI/2019/INF.11 and FCCC/SBI/2019/INF.17. It also had before it the submissions related to the item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Felipe Osses (Chile) and Ismo Ulvila (European Union). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI:
					(a)	Having considered the annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building in accordance with decision 2/CP.22, annex, paragraph 17, recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 25;
					(b)	Having concluded its deliberations on the fourth comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries established under decision 2/CP.7 under the Convention, recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 25;
					(c)	Having concluded its deliberations on the review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at 
COP 25;
					(d)	Having concluded its deliberations on the initial institutional arrangements for capacity-building under the Paris Agreement, recommended that COP 25 recommend a draft decision for consideration and adoption at CMA 2.
		XVI.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 16)
			1.	Proceedings
				76.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 51 agenda item 9, and that the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures would be convened as a contact group co-chaired by Keith Anderson (Switzerland) and Una May Gordon (Jamaica). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				77.	The SBI and the SBSTA recognized that the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures continued its work on the development of the six-year workplan of the forum and its KCI but did not conclude it. The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to forward the matter to COP 25, CMP 15 and CMA 2 to finalize and adopt the workplan taking into account the draft text prepared by the subsidiary bodies.
				78.	Having considered the annual report on the work of the KCI in 2019, including the possible recommendations to the forum to provide to the COP, the CMP and the CMA, the SBI and the SBSTA agreed to forward the report to COP 25, CMP 15 and CMA 2 for their further consideration and for the development of decisions.
				79.	The SBI and the SBSTA recommended the draft rules of procedure of the KCI, as contained in the annex to the KCI report, for consideration and adoption at COP 15, CMP 15 and CMA 2.
		XVII.	Gender and climate change
(Agenda item 17)
			80.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2019/15. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled that COP 25, at its 1st meeting, had referred to the SBI the consideration of the annual report on gender composition. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider both matters in informal consultations co-facilitated by Jorge Pinto Antunes (European Union) and Winifred Masiko (Uganda). At its 3rd meeting, having considered the review of the Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan on the basis of all submissions received and reports produced thereunder, including the informal note prepared by the co-facilitators of the informal consultations at SBI 50, the SBI recommended a draft decision for further consideration and adoption at COP 25.
		XVIII.	Report on activities related to Action for Climate Empowerment
(Agenda item 18)
			81.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the summary report on the 7th Dialogue on Action for Climate Empowerment.
		XIX.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
(Agenda item 19)
			A.	Audit report and financial statements for 2018
(Agenda sub-item 19(a))
			B.	Budget performance for the biennium 2018–2019
(Agenda sub-item 19(b))
			C.	Other budgetary matters
(Agenda sub-item 19(c))
				1.	Proceedings
					82.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2019/14 and Add.1–2, FCCC/SBI/2019/INF.9 and Add.1, FCCC/SBI/2019/INF.12 and FCCC/SBI/2019/INF.16. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited the Deputy Executive Secretary to introduce the matters and a representative of the United Nations Board of Auditors to present the key points from the audit of the 2018 financial statements. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to establish a contact group chaired by Mr. Yoo. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					83.	The SBI agreed to continue at SBI 52 its consideration of possible ways to increase the efficiency and transparency of the budget process, including options for increasing the flexibility of the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities, approaches to addressing outstanding contributions to the core budget, the level of the working capital reserve, and timely funding for the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process.
					84.	The SBI took note of the information in the documents on administrative, financial and institutional matters referred to in paragraph 82 above.
					85.	The SBI recommended two draft decisions on administrative, financial and institutional matters: one for consideration and adoption at COP 25 and one for consideration and adoption at CMP 15.
		XX.	Other matters
(Agenda item 20)
			86.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. No other matters were raised.
		XXI.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 21)
			1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
				87.	At the 3rd meeting of the SBI, the Deputy Executive Secretary provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted at this session, in accordance with rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied. He informed the SBI that several activities resulting from the negotiations at this session called for more secretariat support and required resources over and above the core budget for the biennium 2020–2021.
				88.	Under agenda sub-item 13(a), “Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network”, funding in the amount of EUR 77,000 will be required in 2020 to prepare and organize an in-session technology day. According to the UNFCCC budget, this falls into the category of temporary or short-term activities, to be funded from voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities.
				89.	The Deputy Executive Secretary noted that the amount presented was preliminary and based on the information available at that time. He expressed the hope that the secretariat can count on the continued generosity of Parties in providing funding for activities in a timely and predictable manner. He also noted that without such contributions the secretariat will not be in a position to provide the requested support.
			2.	Closure of and report on the session
				90.	At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur and additional Rapporteur to complete the report with the assistance of the secretariat and to make it available to all Parties.
				91.	At the end of the 3rd meeting, the Chair closed the session.
			
				
