|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBI/2023/21 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 15 March 2024  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Implementation
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its fifty-ninth session, held in the United Arab Emirates from 30 November to 6 December 2023
	Contents
		Page
		Abbreviations and acronyms		4
		I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)		5
		II.	Organizational matters 
(Agenda item 2)		5
			A.	Adoption of the agenda		5
			B.	Election of officers other than the Chair		7
			C.	Organization of the work of the session		7
			D.	Multilateral assessment under the international assessment and review process		8
			E.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process		8
			F.	Mandated events		8
		III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda item 3)		8
			A.	Status of submission and review of national communications and biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		8
			B.	Compilations and syntheses of biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I 
to the Convention		8
			C.	Reports on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to 
the Convention		8
		IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda item 4)		9
			A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I 
to the Convention		9
			B.	Provision of financial and technical support		9
			C.	Report of the Consultative Group of Experts		9
			D.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties 
not included in Annex I to the Convention		11
		V.	Reporting and review pursuant to Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: provision of financial and technical support to developing country Parties for reporting and  capacity-building
(Agenda item 5)		12
		VI.	Review of the status of the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism
(Agenda item 6)		12
		VII.	Sharm el-Sheikh mitigation ambition and implementation work programme referred to in 
decision 4/CMA.4 
(Agenda item 7)		13
		VIII.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 8)		13
		IX.	Work programme on just transition pathways referred to in the relevant paragraphs of 
decision 1/CMA.4 
(Agenda item 9)		14
		X.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures 
serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 10)		14
		XI.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security	
(Agenda item 11)		14
		XII.	Matters relating to adaptation
(Agenda item 12)		15
			A.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in 
decision 7/CMA.3		15
			B.	Report of the Adaptation Committee and review of the progress, effectiveness and 
performance of the Adaptation Committee		15
			C.	National adaptation plans		16
		XIII.	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impact	s (Agenda item 13)		16
			A.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts		16
			B.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism 
for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts		17
		XIV.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
(Agenda item 14)		17
		XV.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: 
joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre 
and Network 
(Agenda item 15)		19
		XVI.	Matters relating to finance 
(Agenda item 16)		19
			A.	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund		19
			B.	Second review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance		20
		XVII.	Matters relating to capacity-building
(Agenda item 17)		20
		XVIII.	Gender and climate change 
(Agenda item 18)		20
		XIX.	Matters relating to Action for Climate Empowerment 
(Agenda item 19)		20
		XX.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters 
(Agenda item 20)		21
		XXI.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 21)		21
		XXII.	Closure of and report on the session 
(Agenda item 22)		21
		
		
Abbreviations and acronyms
	| AC | Adaptation Committee |
	| AILAC | Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean |
	| CGE | Consultative Group of Experts |
	| CMA | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement |
	| CMP | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol |
	| COP | Conference of the Parties |
	| EIG | Environmental Integrity Group |
	| ETF | enhanced transparency framework under the Paris Agreement |
	| EU | European Union |
	| GCF | Green Climate Fund |
	| GEF | Global Environment Facility |
	| LDC | least developed country |
	| LEG | Least Developed Countries Expert Group |
	| LMDCs | Like-minded Developing Countries |
	| MRV | measurement, reporting and verification |
	| NAP | national adaptation plan |
	| SB | sessions of the subsidiary bodies |
	| SBI | Subsidiary Body for Implementation |
	| SBSTA | Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice |
	
	
I.	Opening of the session
(Agenda item 1)
	1.	SBI 59 was held at Expo City Dubai in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, from 30 November to 6 December 2023.
	2.	The Chair of the SBI, Nabeel Munir (Pakistan), opened the session and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Gonzalo Guaiquil (Chile) as Vice-Chair and Ayşin Turpanci (Türkiye) as Rapporteur.
II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
	A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
		3.	At its 1st meeting, on 30 November, the SBI considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations and the supplementary provisional agenda. The Chair of the SBI recalled the understanding reached among Parties outlined by the COP President at the 1st plenary meeting of COP 28, which applies mutatis mutandis to the SBI, and proposed that the supplementary provisional agenda be amended to reflect this understanding, with items 21–24 deleted and the subsequent items renumbered accordingly.
		4.	The SBI adopted the agenda as follows:
		1.	Opening of the session.
		2.	Organizational matters:
			(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
			(b)	Election of officers other than the Chair;
			(c)	Organization of the work of the session;
			(d)	Multilateral assessment under the international assessment and review process;
			(e)	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process;
			(f)	Mandated events.
		3.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention:
			(g)	Status of submission and review of national communications and biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(h)	Compilations and syntheses of biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(i)	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention.
		4.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention:
			(j)	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(k)	Provision of financial and technical support;
				(l)	Report of the Consultative Group of Experts;
				(m)	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention.
				5.	Reporting and review pursuant to Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: provision of financial and technical support to developing country Parties for reporting and capacity-building.
				6.	Review of the status of the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism.
				7.	Sharm el-Sheikh mitigation ambition and implementation work programme referred to in decision 4/CMA.4.*
				8.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement.*
				9.	Work programme on just transition pathways referred to in the relevant paragraphs of decision 1/CMA.4.*
				10.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement.*
				11.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security.*
				12.	Matters relating to adaptation:
					(n)	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3;*
						(o)	Report of the Adaptation Committee and review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee;*
						(p)	National adaptation plans.
				13.	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts:
					(q)	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts;*
						(r)	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.*
				14.	Matters relating to the least developed countries.
				15.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network.*
				16.	Matters relating to finance:
					(s)	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund;
						(t)	Second review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance.
				17.	Matters relating to capacity-building.
				18.	Gender and climate change.
				19.	Matters relating to Action for Climate Empowerment.
				20.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters.
				21.	Other matters.
				22.	Closure of and report on the session.
	B.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
		5.	At the 1st meeting of the SBI, which was held jointly with the 1st meeting of SBSTA 59, the Chair recalled that the SBI was expected to elect its Rapporteur for 2024 and also recalled decision 23/CP.18, in which Parties agreed to give active consideration to increasing the participation of women in UNFCCC bodies. At the 4th meeting of the SBI, which was held jointly with the 4th meeting of SBSTA 59, on 6 December, the Chair informed Parties that the secretariat had not yet received any nominations for SBI Rapporteur. In accordance with rule 22, paragraph 2, of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the current Rapporteur, Ayşin Turpanci, will remain in office until her successor has been elected.
	C.	Organization of the work of the session 
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
		6.	At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled the proposal for the organization of work outlined in the note that he prepared jointly with the SBSTA Chair. In view of the heavy workload, he urged delegates to arrive at meetings on time in order to maximize negotiation time and ensure timely closure of the session.
		7.	The Chair drew attention to the deadline for all groups to conclude their work by 6 p.m. on 5 December to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions in all official United Nations languages for the closing plenary on 6 December. To accelerate work, he urged Parties to start drafting texts as early as possible and invited pairs of co-chairs and co-facilitators to assist in organizing the work. He encouraged Parties to keep all negotiation meetings, except those on matters requiring consideration specifically by Parties, open to observers.
		8.	On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to proceed on that basis and in line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
		9.	The documents that were before SBI 59 are available on the UNFCCC website.
		10.	At the 2nd meeting of the SBI, which was held jointly with the 2nd meetings of SBSTA 59, COP 28, CMP 18 and CMA 5, on 30 November, statements were made by representatives of 21 Parties, including 13 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; Coalition for Rainforest Nations; EIG; EU and its member States; Group of 77 and China; LDCs; LMDCs; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of the nine UNFCCC constituencies: business and industry, children and youth, environmental, farmers and agricultural, research and independent, and trade union non-governmental organizations; Indigenous Peoples organizations; local governmental and municipal authorities; and women and gender constituency.
		11.	At the same meeting, statements were made by representatives of seven intergovernmental organizations: Committee on Earth Observation Satellites on behalf of itself and the Coordination Group for Meteorological Satellites; Global Climate Observing System; Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; International Civil Aviation Organization; International Maritime Organization; World Climate Research Programme; and World Meteorological Organization.
	D.	Multilateral assessment under the international assessment and review process
(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
		12.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI took note of the information provided by its Chair on the organization of the first multilateral assessment working group session in the fifth and final cycle of the international assessment and review process, which was to take place from 5 to 6 December 2023 featuring 13 Parties included in Annex I to the Convention.,
	E.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process 
(Agenda sub-item 2(e))
		13.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI took note of the information provided by its Chair on the fifteenth workshop for the facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process, which was to take place from 3 to 4 December 2023 featuring 14 Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention.
	F.	Mandated events
(Agenda sub-item 2(f))
		14.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI took note of the information provided by its Chair on the mandated events being held in conjunction with this session.
III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 3)
	A.	Status of submission and review of national communications and biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(a))
	B.	Compilations and syntheses of biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(b))
	C.	Reports on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(c))
		15.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider these matters in informal consultations co-facilitated by Toby Hedger (United States of America) and Tian Wang (China).
		16.	At the 4th meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that Parties could not conclude consideration of the matters at this session. In accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matters will be included in the provisional agenda for SBI 60 (June 2024).
IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 4)
	A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda sub-item 4(a))
		17.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations to be held back-to-back with informal consultations for agenda sub-item 4(d), “Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention”, and co-facilitated by Mausami Desai (United States) and Xiang Gao (China).
		18.	At the 4th meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that Parties could not conclude consideration of the matter at this session. In accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBI 60.
	B.	Provision of financial and technical support
(Agenda sub-item 4(b))
		19.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations to be held back-to-back with informal consultations for agenda item 5, “Reporting and review pursuant to Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: provision of financial and technical support to developing country Parties for reporting and capacity-building”, and co-facilitated by Julia Gardiner (Australia) and Sandra Motshwanedi (South Africa).
		20.	At its 4th meeting, the SBI concluded that it had engaged in constructive discussion on the matter at this session and agreed to continue consideration thereof at SBI 60 taking into account the draft text prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda sub-item at this session.
	C.	Report of the Consultative Group of Experts
(Agenda sub-item 4(c))
		1.	Proceedings
			21.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mausami Desai and Xiang Gao. At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			22.	The SBI welcomed the report on the progress of the CGE in implementing its workplan for 2023.
			23.	The SBI invited the CGE to report orally on its annual report to the SBI, under this agenda item, starting at SBI 61 (November 2024), and extended appreciation to the CGE for providing in the report referred to in paragraph 22 above the information requested at SBI 57.
			24.	The SBI also extended appreciation to the CGE for successfully implementing its workplan for 2023 and for continuing to provide technical advice and support to developing country Parties for preparing their national communications, biennial update reports and biennial transparency reports.
			25.	The SBI acknowledged the achievements of the CGE in implementing its workplan for 2022, in particular training 84 national experts from 66 countries in Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean during two regional hands-on training workshops, organized in Bonn, on tracking progress towards implementing and achieving nationally determined contributions under the ETF.
			26.	The SBI also acknowledged the achievements of the CGE in implementing its workplan for 2023, in particular:
			Training 157 national experts from 78 countries in Africa, Asia and the Pacific, Eastern Europe, and Latin America and the Caribbean during three regional hands-on training workshops on reporting information on climate change impacts and adaptation and on support needed and received in relation to adaptation;
			Hosting a webinar series entitled “Shining the spotlight on CGE training materials for reporting on climate change mitigation, including on Article 6 of Paris agreement”, which was attended by 155 experts;
			Finalizing and publishing updated CGE training materials for reporting on adaptation and mitigation under the ETF;
			Finalizing, translating and publishing the second edition of the CGE technical handbook for developing country Parties on preparing for implementation of the ETF;
			Adding two video interviews of national experts to the CGE toolbox on institutional arrangements for MRV and preparing for the ETF;
			Continuing to offer the e-learning programme for national experts on preparing national communications;
			Continuing to offer the training programme on the technical analysis of biennial update reports to experts on the UNFCCC roster;
			Undertaking targeted analytical work, such as compiling information on constraints, lessons learned and capacity-building needs in relation to developing country Parties’ reporting under the Convention and preparation for the ETF;
			Representatives participating as observers in the technical assessment of Parties’ submitted proposed forest reference emission levels and/or forest reference levels;
			Increasing awareness of CGE activities among developing country Parties and among stakeholders, including bilateral and multilateral entities, that are actively engaged in providing support to such Parties in relation to MRV and transparency through special events on the margins of SB 58 and COP 28, as well as through the CGE web pages;
			Continuing to maintain and update the MRV/Transparency help desk and the CGE virtual workspace.
			27.	The SBI encouraged the CGE to continue reviewing its metrics for measuring the progress of work of the CGE at its next meeting.
			28.	The SBI requested the CGE, in developing and implementing its workplan for 2024, to consider, to the extent possible:
			Focusing on providing technical support and advice for the implementation of the ETF, including on the preparation and submission of biennial transparency reports;
			Giving special consideration to the LDCs and small island developing States in its provision of technical support and advice;
			Assisting developing country Parties in maintaining and enhancing appropriate institutional arrangements and national capacities for the implementation of the ETF;
			Continuing to seek to promote gender and geographical balance among experts from developing country Parties participating in activities of the CGE, and in the training programme of experts for review under the Paris Agreement;
			Compiling relevant lessons learned and best practices and the challenges, constraints and needs of developing country Parties in relation to the process of preparing national communications, biennial update reports and biennial transparency reports, including information on their experience in building sustainable capacity for reporting within their respective Governments;
			Addressing the needs of developing country Parties to use the reporting tools referred to in paragraph 8 of decision 5/CMA.3.
			29.	The SBI expressed gratitude to the Governments of Belize, Cabo Verde and Cambodia for hosting the regional hands-on training workshops referred to in paragraph ‎26(a) above and expressed appreciation to the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment Programme and the World Meteorological Organization for their collaboration on these workshops.
			30.	The SBI extended appreciation to Parties that provided financial contributions to support the work of the CGE in 2023.
	D.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 4(d))
		1.	Proceedings
			31.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations to be held back-to-back with informal consultations for agenda sub-item 4(a), “Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention”, and co-facilitated by Mausami Desai and Xiang Gao. At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			32.	The SBI considered the published summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention.
			33.	The SBI engaged in constructive discussion on the technical analysis summary reports and noted the importance of the information contained therein.
			34.	The SBI took note of the technical analysis summary reports finalized by 15 September 2023.
V.	Reporting and review pursuant to Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: provision of financial and technical support to developing country Parties for reporting and 
capacity-building
(Agenda item 5)
	1.	Proceedings
		35.	Building on the momentum achieved at SBI 57, at its 1st meeting the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations to be held back-to-back with informal consultations for agenda sub-item 4(b), “Provision of financial and technical support”, and co-facilitated by Julia Gardiner and Sandra Motshwanedi. At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		36.	The SBI convened informal consultations on this matter.
		37.	The SBI could not conclude consideration of the matter. It agreed to forward the matter to the CMA for further guidance taking into account the draft text for this agenda item available on the UNFCCC website.
VI.	Review of the status of the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism
(Agenda item 6)
	1.	Proceedings
		38.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Kate Hancock (Australia) and Sonam Tashi (Bhutan). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		39.	The SBI considered the agenda item on the review of the status of the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism.
		40.	The SBI, noting the balance in the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism, agreed to forward this matter for consideration at CMP 18 under agenda item 5, “Matters relating to the clean development mechanism”, with a view to considering a transfer from the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism to the Adaptation Fund, and potentially to consider other areas in need of funding.
VII.	Sharm el-Sheikh mitigation ambition and implementation work programme referred to in decision 4/CMA.4*
(Agenda item 7)
	1.	Proceedings
		41.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 59 agenda item 7 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Carlos Fuller (Belize) and Kay Harrison (New Zealand). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below. A representative of one Party made a statement on behalf of the EU and its member States.
	2.	Conclusions
		42.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered matters relating to the Sharm el-Sheikh mitigation ambition and implementation work programme referred to in decision 4/CMA.4.
		43.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to forward this matter to CMA 5 for further guidance taking into account the draft text prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda item.
VIII.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement*
(Agenda item 8)
	1.	Proceedings
		44.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 59 agenda item 5 in a contact group co-chaired by Alison Campbell (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) and Joseph Teo (Singapore). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		45.	The SBI and the SBSTA concluded their consideration of the first global stocktake under the Paris Agreement.
		46.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to forward their work on this matter as captured in the updated textual building blocks together with Parties’ views and submissions not yet fully reflected by the co-chairs of the joint contact group on the first global stocktake for further consideration at CMA 5.
		47.	The SBI and the SBSTA noted that the updated building blocks referred to in paragraph ‎46 above are not an agreed text and represent work in progress, noting that Parties’ views and submissions were not yet fully reflected and that a third iteration was expected. They requested their Chairs to convey the views expressed by Parties on the updated building blocks to the CMA for further consideration and invited the CMA to take into account the views and submissions in a third iteration of the updated building blocks.
IX.	Work programme on just transition pathways referred to in the relevant paragraphs of decision 1/CMA.4*
(Agenda item 9)
	1.	Proceedings
		48.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 59 agenda item 8 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Selam Kidane Abebe (Zambia) and Luisa Roelke (Germany). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		49.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered matters relating to the work programme on just transition pathways referred to in paragraphs 50–52 of decision 1/CMA.4.
		50.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to forward this matter to CMA 5 for further guidance taking into account the draft text prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda item, recognizing that this text does not represent consensus among Parties and further work under the CMA is necessary to finalize the decision.
X.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement*
(Agenda item 10)
	1.	Proceedings
		51.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 59 agenda item 9 in a contact group co-chaired by Catherine Goldberg (United States) and Peter Govindasamy (Singapore). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		52.	The SBI and the SBSTA convened a meeting of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
		53.	The SBI and the SBSTA did not conclude their consideration of matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement. The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to forward the matter to the COP, the CMP and the CMA for further guidance taking into account the draft text for this agenda item available on the UNFCCC website.
XI.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security*
(Agenda item 11)
	1.	Proceedings
		54.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 59 agenda item 10 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Annela Anger-Kraavi (Germany) and Una May Gordon (Dominica). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		55.	The SBI and the SBSTA continued consideration of the elements of the Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security.
		56.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SB 60 (June 2024) taking into account the document prepared at these sessions.
XII.	Matters relating to adaptation
(Agenda item 12)
	A.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3*
(Agenda sub-item 12(a))
		1.	Proceedings
			57.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 59 agenda sub-item 3(a) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Janine Felson (Belize) and Mattias Frumerie (Sweden).
			58.	At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below. Representatives of eight Parties made statements, including six on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group, AILAC, EIG, EU and its member States, LDCs and LMDCs.
		2.	Conclusions
			59.	The SBI and the SBSTA recommended that CMA 5 take up consideration of matters relating to the Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3 with a view to finalizing and adopting the framework referred to in paragraph 8 of decision 3/CMA.4.
	B.	Report of the Adaptation Committee and review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee* 
(Agenda sub-item 12(b))
		60.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 59 agenda sub-item 3(b) in informal consultations co-facilitated by María del Pilar Bueno (Argentina) and Roberta Ianna (Italy).
		61.	At the 4th meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that Parties could not conclude consideration of this matter at this session. In accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBI 60.
	C.	National adaptation plans
(Agenda sub-item 12(c))
		1.	Proceedings
			62.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Antwi-Boasiko Amoah (Ghana) and Jens Fugl (Denmark). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			63.	The SBI considered information on progress, challenges, gaps and needs in relation to the formulation and implementation of NAPs and related information provided by the AC and the LEG at this session.
			64.	The SBI recalled the request to the AC and the LEG to organize training for developing country Parties on addressing identified gaps and needs, which could be held in conjunction with the NAP Expo, the Adaptation Forum or other events outlined in their respective work programmes.
			65.	The SBI noted the actions and steps necessary for it to initiate the assessment of progress in the process to formulate and implement NAPs, which include the issuance of a call for submissions on the matter from Parties and relevant organizations by 1 February 2024, the preparation by the secretariat of a synthesis report on the matter, the organization by the LEG, in collaboration with the AC and with the support of the secretariat, of a meeting of Party experts to consider that synthesis report and the preparation of a report on that meeting, and invited Parties and relevant organizations to contribute to the assessment in a timely manner.
			66.	The SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 60, including in the context of the assessment referred to in paragraph ‎65 above.
XIII.	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 13)
	A.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts*
(Agenda sub-item 13(a))
		67.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 59 agenda sub-item 4(a) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Lucas Di Pietro (Argentina) and Cornelia Jaeger (Austria).
		68.	At their 4th meeting, the SBI and the SBSTA recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption by the appropriate governing body or bodies.,  A representative of one Party made a statement on behalf of EIG.
	B.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts*
(Agenda sub-item 13(b))
		69.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 59 agenda sub-item 4(b) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Lucas Di Pietro and Cornelia Jaeger.
		70.	At their 4th meeting, the SBI and the SBSTA recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption by the appropriate body or bodies.,  Representatives of three Parties made statements, including two on behalf of AILAC and the EU and its member States respectively.
XIV.	Matters relating to the least developed countries 
(Agenda item 14)
	1.	Proceedings
		71.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Jens Fugl and Bob Natifu (Uganda). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		72.	The SBI welcomed the report on the 44th meeting of the LEG, held in Maseru, Lesotho, from 14 to 17 August 2023.
		73.	The SBI also welcomed the successful conduct of the NAP writing workshop for Asian LDCs, held in Kathmandu, Nepal, from 11 to 14 September 2023, for developing existing and formulating new project ideas for submission for funding.
		74.	The SBI further welcomed the successful conduct of the regional NAP Expo for Asia and the Pacific held in Songdo, Republic of Korea, from 28 to 30 August 2023, which provided valuable insights into the formulation and implementation of NAPs and facilitated the sharing of relevant best practices and experience within the region.
		75.	The SBI expressed appreciation to the Government of Lesotho for hosting LEG 44, to the Government of Nepal for hosting the NAP writing workshop referred to in paragraph 73 above and to the organizations that provided technical assistance to LDC representatives during the workshop. It also expressed appreciation to the Government of the Republic of Korea for hosting the NAP Expo referred to in paragraph 74 above and to the organizations, bodies, and regional centres and networks involved in organizing the event.
		76.	The SBI further expressed appreciation to the entities undertaking activities to support the LDCs, including in accessing funding for adaptation action, such as the organization by the GEF of workshops for African, Asian and Pacific LDCs, and requested the LEG to contribute to such activities, as appropriate.
		77.	The SBI expressed appreciation to the LEG and the secretariat for their invaluable work in supporting the LDCs as an important group of countries for the provision of support under the Convention and the Paris Agreement.
		78.	The SBI noted that as at 4 December 2023:
		The LDCs had submitted 46 readiness proposals to the GCF for funding for the formulation of NAPs or other adaptation planning processes, of which 31 had been approved and for 29 of which funds had been disbursed;
		Of the 46 LDCs, 23 had submitted a NAP since the establishment of the process to formulate and implement NAPs in 2010, 14 were in the process of formulating a NAP and 7 had yet to start formulating a NAP;
		Of the 46 LDCs, 5 had accessed funding related to the process to formulate and implement NAPs through the Least Developed Countries Fund during the eighth replenishment cycle of the GEF (2022–2026);
		Of the 46 LDCs, 11 had accredited direct access entities; 6 accredited direct access entities in the LDCs had not yet accessed funding from the GCF.
		79.	The SBI welcomed the NAPs submitted since December 2022, by Bangladesh, Bhutan, Burundi, Haiti, Mozambique and Zambia.
		80.	The SBI invited developed country Parties to share their NAPs and strategies on NAP Central with a view to promoting exchange of experience, lessons learned and best practices in relation to adaptation planning and implementation.
		81.	The SBI requested the LEG to identify the challenges, gaps and needs faced by the seven LDCs referred to in paragraph ‎78(b) above in initiating the formulation of their NAPs, provide recommendations on how to address those challenges, gaps and needs and include information thereon in its report for consideration at SBI 60.
		82.	The SBI noted that the LDCs continue to face significant challenges in accessing funding for the formulation and implementation of NAPs.
		83.	The SBI requested the LEG to convene a meeting with the Adaptation Fund, the GCF, the GEF and other relevant organizations, as part of NAP Expo 2024, to identify ways to assist the LDCs in expeditiously implementing adaptation action based on priorities identified in their NAPs, and to include recommendations in its reports to the SBI with a view to addressing the challenges, gaps and needs that the LDCs continue to face in accessing funding for implementing NAPs.
		84.	The SBI also requested the LEG, in line with its mandate and taking into account relevant evaluations on the provision of technical and financial support to the LDCs, to identify the challenges faced by the LDCs in initiating and/or completing the process of accrediting direct access entities as well as the challenges, gaps and needs faced by the LDCs referred to in paragraph ‎78(d) above in having projects approved by their direct access entities, and include the findings thereon in its report for consideration at SBI 61.
		85.	The SBI invited Parties and organizations with programmes aimed at supporting the LDCs in relation to the process to formulate and implement NAPs to provide information on their programmes to the LEG for inclusion in its annual progress report on NAPs, and to showcase their programmes at the NAP Expo, with a view to making information on such programmes readily available to the LDCs.
		86.	The SBI welcomed the support provided by the LEG to the LDCs for addressing identified data gaps and other gaps and needs related to the process to formulate and implement NAPs, including through the Open NAPs and NAP Data initiatives, and the continued collaboration of the LEG with the Adaptation Fund Board, GCF and GEF secretariats on enhancing access to funding by the LDCs for implementing NAPs under the NAP implementation pipeline development initiative, and requested the LEG to scale up these collaborative efforts.
		87.	The SBI also requested the LEG to continue collaborating with the AC and other UNFCCC constituted bodies that are undertaking adaptation activities as part of their work, as well as under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, in providing support to the LDCs for the process to formulate and implement NAPs and to include information thereon in its reports to the SBI.
		88.	The SBI further requested the LEG to continue enhancing its provision of support to the LDCs for aligning NAPs and nationally determined contributions.
		89.	The SBI noted with appreciation the financial pledges, totalling USD 141.74 million, made by the Governments of Belgium, France, Germany, Norway, Spain and Sweden to the Least Developed Countries Fund at the GEF Pledging Conference held on 4 December 2023, and called for additional contributions to the Fund.
		90.	The SBI invited Parties and relevant organizations to continue providing resources for supporting implementation of the LEG work programme.
XV.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network*
(Agenda item 15)
	91.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 59 agenda item 11 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Elfriede Anna More (Austria) and Vositha Wijenayake (Sri Lanka). At its 4th meeting, the SBI recommended draft decisions for consideration and adoption at COP 28 and CMA 5. A representative of one Party made a statement.
XVI.	Matters relating to finance
(Agenda item 16)
	A.	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund
(Agenda sub-item 16(a))
		92.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to defer consideration of this matter to SBI 60.
	B.	Second review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance 
(Agenda sub-item 16(b))
		1.	Proceedings
			93.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Apollonia Miola (Italy) and Ali Waqas Malik (Pakistan). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			94.	The SBI considered the matter of the second review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance.
			95.	The SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 61.
XVII.	Matters relating to capacity-building 
(Agenda item 17)
	96.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider these matters in informal consultations co-facilitated by Catherine Goldberg and Gonzalo Guaiquil. At its 4th meeting, the SBI recommended draft decisions for consideration and adoption at COP 28 and CMA 5.
XVIII.	Gender and climate change
(Agenda item 18)
	97.	At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled that the COP had noted that gender issues on its agenda would be considered by the SBI under this item. This includes the consideration of the annual report on gender composition and the synthesis report on progress in integrating a gender perspective into UNFCCC constituted body processes. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Angela Ebeleke (Democratic Republic of the Congo) and Marc-André Lafrance (Canada). At its 4th meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 28.
XIX.	Matters relating to Action for Climate Empowerment
(Agenda item 19)
	98.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Pemy Gasela (South Africa) and Arne Riedel (Germany).
	99.	At the 4th meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that Parties could not conclude consideration of the matter at this session. In accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBI 60.
XX.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
(Agenda item 20)
	1.	Proceedings
		100.	At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled that, in addition to the consideration of the financial statements, audit reports, updates of the work programme and the status of contributions and fees, the SBI was invited to consider the note by the secretariat on the policy and criteria for engagement and collaboration with non-Party stakeholders and the note by the secretariat on important changes to the secretariat’s administrative issuances. The SBI agreed to consider this matter in a contact group co-chaired by Georg Børsting (Norway) and Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago).
		101.	At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		102.	The SBI took note of the information contained in the documents on administrative, financial and institutional matters prepared by the secretariat.
		103.	It requested the secretariat to organize a session to engage with Parties on the secretariat’s policy and criteria for engagement and collaboration with non-Party stakeholders, to be held at SBI 60.
		104.	The SBI recommended two draft decisions on administrative, financial and institutional matters for consideration and adoption at COP 28 and CMP 18.
XXI.	Other matters
(Agenda item 21)
	105.	At its 4th meeting, the SBI recommended that the CMP take note of the annual report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol contained in document FCCC/KP/CMP/2023/6.
	106.	No other matters were raised.
XXII.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 22)
	1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
		107.	At the 4th meeting, a representative of the secretariat informed the SBI that several activities resulting from the conclusions adopted at this session require additional resources over and above the core budget for the biennium 2024–2025, in the amount of EUR 275,000. Relevant requests for activities are contained in conclusions adopted under various SBI, including joint SBI–SBSTA, agenda items.
		108.	Under joint SBI agenda sub-item 13(b) and SBSTA agenda sub-item 4(b), “Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts”, supplementary funding of EUR 215,000 will be required in 2024 to develop draft guidelines on preventing conflicts of interest in relation to the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change and to facilitate the continued provision of technical assistance under the Santiago network.
		109.	Under joint SBI agenda item 15 and SBSTA agenda item 11, “Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network”, supplementary funding of EUR 60,000 will be required in 2024–2025 to support the Technology Mechanism initiative on artificial intelligence for climate action, which includes preparing a technical paper on artificial intelligence for climate action in developing countries.
		110.	The representative of the secretariat noted that amounts presented are preliminary and based on information available at the time. The representative also noted that the secretariat is counting on Parties to provide supplementary funding for these activities in a timely and predictable manner, as without such contributions the secretariat will not be in a position to provide the requested support.
		111.	The representative concluded by noting that costs for 2026 and beyond will be reviewed in the context of preparing the budget for the biennium 2026–2027.
	2.	Closure of and report on the session
		112.	At the 3rd meeting of the SBI, which was held jointly with the 3rd meeting of SBSTA 59, on 6 December, statements were made by representatives of 15 Parties, including 12 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; AILAC; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Coalition for Rainforest Nations; EIG; EU and its member States; Group of 77 and China; LDCs; LMDCs; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of eight UNFCCC constituencies: business and industry, children and youth, environmental, farmers and agricultural, and trade union non-governmental organizations; Indigenous Peoples organizations; local governmental and municipal authorities; and women and gender constituency.
		113.	At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session and make it available to Parties.
		114.	At the end of the 4th meeting, the Chair thanked Parties and observers for their constructive engagement throughout the session. He also thanked the co-chairs and co-facilitators for their work and the other presiding officers for their close collaboration. The Chair then closed the session.
			
