|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBI/2022/20 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 17 March 2023  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Implementation
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its fifty-seventh session, held in Sharm el-Sheikh from 6 to 12 November 2022
	Contents
		Page
		Abbreviations and acronyms		4
			I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)		5
			II.	Organizational matters 
(Agenda item 2)		5
				A.	Adoption of the agenda		5
				B.	Organization of the work of the session		7
				C.	Election of officers other than the Chair		8
				D.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process		8
				E.	Mandated events		8
			III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda item 3)		8
				A.	Status of submission and review of national communications and biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		8
				B.	Compilations and syntheses of biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the
Convention		8
				C.	Reports on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		8
			IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 4)		9
				A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I 
to the Convention		9
				B.	Report of the Consultative Group of Experts		9
				C.	Provision of financial and technical support		10
				D.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention		11
				V.	Matters relating to the clean development mechanism registry referred to in paragraph 75(b) 
of the annex to decision 3/CMA.3
(Agenda item 5)		11
				VI.	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol 
(Agenda item 6)		12
				VII.	Matters relating to the work programme for urgently scaling up mitigation ambition and
implementation referred to in paragraph 27 of decision 1/CMA.3
(Agenda item 7)		12
				VIII.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 8)		13
				IX.	Second periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress	 towards achieving it
(Agenda item 9)		14
				X.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture
(Agenda item 10)		14
				XI.	Report of the Adaptation Committee 
(Agenda item 11)		14
				XII.	Matters relating to the least developed countries 
(Agenda item 12)		15
				XIII.	National adaptation plans
(Agenda item 13)		15
				XIV.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision	 7/CMA.3
(Agenda item 14)		15
				XV.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage	 associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 15)		16
				XVI.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and	 Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts 
(Agenda item 16)		16
				XVII.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism 
(Agenda item 17)		16
					A.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre 	 and Network		16
					B.	Linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism of the Convention	17
					C.	First periodic assessment referred to in paragraph 69 of decision 1/CP.21		17
					D.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer		17
			XVIII.	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund
(Agenda item 18)		19
				A.	Membership of the Adaptation Fund Board		19
				B.	Fourth review of the Adaptation Fund		19
			XIX.	Matters relating to capacity-building 
(Agenda item 19)		19
			XX.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the	 Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 20)		19
			XXI.	Gender and climate change
(Agenda item 21)		20
			XXII.	Matters relating to Action for Climate Empowerment
(Agenda item 22)		20
			XXIII.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
(Agenda item 23)		20
			XXIV.	Reporting and review pursuant to Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: provision of financial 
and technical support to developing country Parties for reporting and capacity‑building 
(Agenda item 24)		20
			XXV.	Other matters
(Agenda item 25)		21
			XXVI.		Closure of and report on the session 
(Agenda item 26)		22
		
Abbreviations and acronyms
	| BTR | biennial transparency report |
	| BUR | biennial update report |
	| CBIT | Capacity-building Initiative for Transparency |
	| CGE | Consultative Group of Experts |
	| CMA | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement |
	| CMP | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol |
	| COP | Conference of the Parties |
	| CTCN | Climate Technology Centre and Network |
	| ETF | enhanced transparency framework under the Paris Agreement |
	| GCF | Green Climate Fund |
	| GEF | Global Environment Facility |
	| LDC | least developed country |
	| LEG | Least Developed Countries Expert Group |
	| MRV | measurement, reporting and verification |
	| NAP | national adaptation plan |
	| NC | national communication |
	| NDC | nationally determined contribution |
	| non-Annex I Party | Party not included in Annex I to the Convention |
	| SBI | Subsidiary Body for Implementation |
	| SBSTA | Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice |
	| SIDS | small island developing State(s) |
	| TNA | technology needs assessment |
	
	
	
I.	Opening of the session
(Agenda item 1)
	1.	SBI 57 was held at the Sharm el-Sheikh International Convention Center in Sharm el‑Sheikh, Egypt, from 6 to 12 November 2022.
	2.	The Chair of the SBI, Marianne Karlsen (Norway), opened the session on Sunday, 6 November, and welcomed all Parties and observers. She also welcomed Juan Carlos Monterrey Gomez (Panama) as Vice-Chair and Ayşin Turpanci (Türkiye) as Rapporteur.
II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
	A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
		3.	At its 1st meeting, on 6 November, the SBI considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations.
		4.	The Chair recalled that CMA 4 at its 1st meeting, on 6 November, referred consideration of matters under its agenda sub-item 5(a), titled “Reporting and review pursuant to Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: provision of financial and technical support to developing country Parties for reporting and capacity-building” to the SBI. The Chair proposed that the matter be considered by the SBI under an equally titled item, included in the SBI 57 agenda as item 24.
		5.	The Chair also proposed that sub-item 4(a) be held in abeyance to enable her to continue consultations, initiated with Parties at SBI 56, on the way forward for this sub‑item.
		6.	Also at its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to the Chair’s proposal outlined in paragraphs 4–5 above and adopted the agenda as follows, with sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance:
			1.	Opening of the session.
			2.	Organizational matters:
				(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
				(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
				(c)	Election of officers other than the Chair;
				(d)	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process;
				(e)	Mandated events.
			3.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention:
				(a)	Status of submission and review of national communications and biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(b)	Compilations and syntheses of biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(c)	Reports on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention.
			4.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention:
				(a)	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(b)	Report of the Consultative Group of Experts;
				(c)	Provision of financial and technical support;
				(d)	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention.
			5.	Matters relating to the clean development mechanism registry referred to in paragraph 75(b) of the annex to decision 3/CMA.3.
			6.	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol.
			7.	Matters relating to the work programme for urgently scaling up mitigation ambition and implementation referred to in paragraph 27 of decision 1/CMA.3.*
			8.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement.*
			9.	Second periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it.*
			10.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture.*
			11.	Report of the Adaptation Committee.*
			12.	Matters relating to the least developed countries.
			13.	National adaptation plans.
			14.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3.*
			15.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.*
			16.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.*
			17.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism:
				(f)	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network;*
				(g)	Linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism of the Convention;
				(h)	First periodic assessment referred to in paragraph 69 of decision 1/CP.21;
				(i)	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer.
			18.	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund:
				(j)	Membership of the Adaptation Fund Board;
				(k)	Fourth review of the Adaptation Fund.
			19.	Matters relating to capacity-building.
			20.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement.*
			21.	Gender and climate change.
			22.	Matters relating to Action for Climate Empowerment.
			23.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters.
			24.	Reporting and review pursuant to Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: provision of financial and technical support to developing country Parties for reporting and capacity-building.
			25.	Other matters.
			26.	Closure of and report on the session.
		7.	At the 3rd meeting, on 12 November, the Chair reported on the outcomes of the consultations on sub-item 4(a) referred to in paragraph 5 above. She informed Parties that, not having received any requests from a Party or a group to hold consultations on the way forward on this sub-item, it will be included in the provisional agenda for SBI 58 (June 2023).
	B.	Organization of the work of the session
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
		8.	At the 1st meeting of the SBI, the Chair drew attention to the deadline for all groups to conclude their work by 6 p.m. on Friday, 11 November, to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary, which was to be convened on Saturday, 12 November. She informed Parties that any considerations under an agenda item not completed by that deadline might have to be continued at SBI 58.
		9.	The Chair recalled recognizing in her scenario note that the comprehensive agenda of the SBI would make for a very busy session. She urged Parties to engage constructively in negotiations from their first meetings, capitalizing on progress where appropriate.
		10.	The Chair noted that she was working closely with the SBSTA Chair on the joint agenda items. She informed Parties that strict time management measures would be applied to maximize negotiation time and avoid, as far as possible, clashes of meetings on items with known substantive linkages.
		11.	The Chair encouraged Parties to allow all negotiation meetings to be open to observers, unless matters needed to be examined specifically by Parties.
		12.	On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to proceed on that basis and in line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
		13.	At the 2nd meeting of the SBI, on 6 November, which was held jointly with the 2nd meetings of the COP, the CMP, the CMA and the SBSTA, statements were made by representatives of 21 Parties, including 14 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; Coalition for Rainforest Nations; Environmental Integrity Group; European Union and its member States; Group of 77 and China; Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; least developed countries; Like-minded Developing Countries; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of nine UNFCCC constituencies: indigenous peoples organizations; local government and municipal authorities; the women and gender constituency; and business and industry, children and youth, environmental, farmers, research and independent, and trade union non-governmental organizations.
	C.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
		14.	At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled that the SBI was expected to elect its Vice-Chair and Rapporteur for 2023. At the 3rd meeting, the Chair informed Parties that the secretariat had not received any nominations at that stage. In accordance with rule 22, paragraph 2, of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the Vice Chair, Juan Carlos Monterrey Gomez, and the Rapporteur, Ayşin Turpanci, will remain in office until their successors are elected at the next session.
	D.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process
(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
		15.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI took note of the information provided by its Chair on the thirteenth workshop for the facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process, which was to take place from 11 to 12 November, featuring 11 non-Annex I Parties.
	E.	Mandated events
(Agenda sub-item 2(e))
		16.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI took note of the information provided by its Chair on the mandated events being held in conjunction with this session.
III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 3)
	A.	Status of submission and review of national communications and biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(a))
	B.	Compilations and syntheses of biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(b))
	C.	Reports on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(c))
		17.	At the 1st meeting, the Chair informed Parties that the compilation and synthesis of the fourth biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention had been updated, reflecting recent submissions from two Parties and resubmissions from other Parties following the technical expert review.
		18.	At the same meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to defer consideration of sub-items 3(a–c) to SBI 58.
IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 4)
	A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance)
	B.	Report of the Consultative Group of Experts
(Agenda sub-item 4(b))
		1.	Proceedings
			19.	The SBI had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2022/16 and FCCC/SBI/2022/INF.12. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited a representative of the CGE to deliver a brief oral report on the work of the CGE. The SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Aaron Kirby (Australia) and Sandra Motshwanedi (South Africa). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			20.	The SBI welcomed the report on the progress of work in 2022 of the CGE.
			21.	The SBI took note of the revised vision, mission and metrics to measure the progress as well as the strategic priorities of the CGE for 2020–2026, which are intended to guide its provision of technical support and advice to developing country Parties for implementing the existing MRV arrangements under the Convention and the ETF under the Paris Agreement, including supporting the establishment of institutional arrangements, in a smooth, timely and sustainable manner, and invited the CGE to elaborate in its next annual report on the relationship between the metrics for measuring the progress and the terms of reference of the CGE as contained in the annex to decision 14/CP.26.
			22.	The SBI extended its appreciation to the CGE for successfully implementing its workplan for 2022 and continuing to provide technical advice and support to developing country Parties for preparing their NCs, BURs and BTRs.
			23.	The SBI acknowledged the achievements of the CGE in implementing its workplan for 2022, in particular:
			(a)	Training 51 national experts from Asia and the Pacific, and Eastern Europe at a regional hands-on training workshop on tracking progress of NDCs under the ETF;
			(b)	Hosting a webinar series entitled “How climate transparency arrangements matter at the national level”, which was attended by 197 experts;
			(c)	Adding two case stories, three video interviews and two animations on sustainable institutional arrangements to the CGE toolbox on institutional arrangements;
			(d)	Continuing to offer the e-learning programme on NCs;
			(e)	Continuing to offer the training programme on the technical analysis of BURs to experts on the UNFCCC roster of experts;
			(f)	Undertaking targeted analytical work, such as compiling information on problems, constraints, lessons learned and capacity-building needs in relation to developing country Parties’ reporting;
			(g)	Participating as an observer in the technical assessment of submissions from Parties on their proposed forest reference emission levels and/or forest reference levels;
			(h)	Increasing awareness of CGE activities among stakeholders that are actively engaged in providing support to developing country Parties in the areas of MRV and transparency, including bilateral and multilateral entities, at special events on the margins of SB 56 and COP 27, as well as via the CGE website and interactive online platform.
			24.	The SBI requested the CGE to clearly reflect, in its next and subsequent annual progress reports to the SBI, how it has fulfilled its mandates, contained in the annex to decision 14/CP.26, to support implementation of the existing MRV arrangements under the Convention by non-Annex I Parties and to support implementation of the ETF under Article 13 of the Paris Agreement.
			25.	The SBI also requested the CGE to enhance its provision of technical advice and support to developing country Parties for reporting information pursuant to decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapters III–IV.
			26.	The SBI acknowledged the efforts of the CGE in 2022 to strengthen its collaboration with other UNFCCC constituted bodies and requested the CGE to continue its collaboration with other UNFCCC constituted bodies and international organizations on developing tools and technical materials with a view to increasing efficiency and avoiding duplication of work, as appropriate.
			27.	The SBI expressed its gratitude to the Government of Armenia for hosting the regional hands-on training workshop referred to in paragraph 23 above.
			28.	The SBI extended its appreciation to the Parties that provided financial contributions to support the work of the CGE in 2022.
	C.	Provision of financial and technical support
(Agenda sub-item 4(c))
		1.	Proceedings
			29.	The SBI had before it documents FCCC/CP/2022/5 and FCCC/SBI/2022/INF.15. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited a representative of the GEF to deliver a brief oral report on its work. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Helen Plume (New Zealand) and Tian Wang (China). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			30.	The SBI welcomed the information provided by the GEF in its report to COP 27, on:
			(a)	Operationalization of the CBIT, including its programming and implementation modalities, and the voluntary contributions pledged by several countries;
			(b)	Financial support requested, approved and provided for the preparation of NCs and BURs by non-Annex I Parties, including support provided through the CBIT Global Coordination Platform.
			31.	The SBI noted the increase in the allocation to the climate change focal area set aside for enabling activities, including the CBIT, from USD 165 million in the seventh GEF replenishment cycle to USD 220 million in the eighth.
			32.	The SBI underscored the importance of providing adequate and predictable financial and technical support to developing country Parties to meet their MRV requirements under the Convention and build and enhance their institutional and technical capacity on a continuous basis.
			33.	The SBI noted the importance of providing timely responses to requests from developing country Parties and recalled paragraphs 8–9 of decision 10/CP.23, which encouraged the GEF to provide adequate support for reporting under the Convention to assist developing country Parties in submitting requests and to further consider ways to improve its access modalities for developing country Parties seeking such support.
			34.	The SBI also noted the improved procedures of the GEF for providing support to developing country Parties and, recalling paragraph 4 of decision 13/CP.25, further noted the invitation to the GEF and its implementing agencies to continue efforts to minimize the time between approval of project concepts, the development and approval of the related projects for preparing NCs and BURs, and the disbursement of funds.
			35.	The SBI noted the efforts of the GEF to improve and streamline its application process for preparing reports under the Convention and highlighted the importance of continuing such efforts.
			36.	The SBI also noted that, as at 11 November 2022, 419 NCs (i.e. 154 first, 145 second, 96 third, 20 fourth, 3 fifth and 1 sixth NC) and 154 BURs (i.e. 82 first, 37 second, 24 third, 10 fourth and 1 fifth BUR) had been submitted by non-Annex I Parties, with the submission of an additional 7 third and 14 fourth NCs, and 14 first, 2 second, 1 third, 1 fourth and 1 fifth BUR, expected by the end of 2022.
	D.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 4(d))
		37.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI took note of the summary reports finalized by 24 August 2022.
V.	Matters relating to the clean development mechanism registry referred to in paragraph 75(b) of the annex to decision 3/CMA.3
(Agenda item 5)
	38.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Kate Hancock (Australia) and Sonam Tashi (Bhutan). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to recommend to CMP 17 to consider the measures for implementing aspects in decision 3/CMA.3 relating to the transfer of certified emission reductions from the clean development mechanism registry to the registry for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement under its agenda item 5, titled “Matters relating to the clean development mechanism”, taking into account the draft texts on the UNFCCC website.,
VI.	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda item 6)
	39.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI recommended that the CMP take note of the information presented in the 2022 report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol.
VII.	Matters relating to the work programme for urgently scaling up mitigation ambition and implementation referred to in paragraph 27 of decision 1/CMA.3*
(Agenda item 7)
	1.	Proceedings
		40.	The SBI had before it relevant submissions. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 57 agenda item 8 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Carlos Fuller (Belize) and Kay Harrison (New Zealand). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		41.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered matters relating to the work programme for urgently scaling up mitigation ambition and implementation in this critical decade in a manner that complements the global stocktake referred to in paragraph 27 of decision 1/CMA.3 with a view to recommending a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at CMA 4.
		42.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the submissions from Parties and the discussions held at the mandated pre-sessional workshop on the work programme, which helped to enhance understanding of the proposals Parties put forward in their submissions and advance consideration of matters relating to the work programme.
		43.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to recommend to CMA 4 the draft decision text on this matter for consideration, recognizing that this text does not represent a consensus among Parties and that further work by the CMA is necessary to finalize the decision at this session.
VIII.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement*
(Agenda item 8)
	1.	Proceedings
		44.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 57 agenda item 9 in a joint contact group co-chaired by Hana Alhashim (United Arab Emirates) and Alison Campbell (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		45.	The SBI and the SBSTA emphasized the importance of the global stocktake for achieving the long-term goals of the Paris Agreement.
		46.	The SBI and the SBSTA expressed their appreciation to the co-facilitators of the technical dialogue for their efforts to deliver the second meeting of that dialogue, and to facilitators, rapporteurs and participating experts, Parties and non-Party stakeholders for their contributions to and engagement in this meeting of the dialogue.
		47.	The SBI and the SBSTA also expressed their appreciation to the co-facilitators of the technical dialogue for their efforts to prepare the summary report on the first meeting of the technical dialogue, the informal consultations organized on this report on 6 October 2022 and the information note for the second meeting of the technical dialogue, held on 18 October 2022.
		48.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the co-facilitators of the technical dialogue to take into account feedback provided by Parties at the second meeting of the technical dialogue, and by the joint contact group of the SBSTA and the SBI, when preparing the summary report on the second meeting and designing the third meeting of the technical dialogue, in order to ensure an inclusive, balanced, comprehensive and focused Party-driven process, with the participation of non-Party stakeholders, that facilitates the broad participation of Parties and non-Party stakeholders.
		49.	The SBI and the SBSTA also requested the co-facilitators of the technical dialogue to prepare the summary report on the second meeting of the technical dialogue well in advance of the third meeting and to continue the practice of engaging with Parties, noting that the co‑facilitators are similarly encouraged to engage with non-Party stakeholders, after publishing the summary report.
		50.	The SBI and the SBSTA reiterated the call for inputs referred to in paragraph 19 of decision 19/CMA.1 and encouraged Parties and non-Party stakeholders to submit such inputs for consideration at the third meeting of the technical dialogue.
		51.	The SBI and the SBSTA acknowledged the need to prepare for the consideration of outputs component of the first global stocktake in a manner that aligns with paragraphs 3–6 of decision 19/CMA.1.
		52.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited submissions by 15 February 2023 on views on the approach to the consideration of outputs component of the first global stocktake.
		53.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested their Chairs, with the support of the secretariat, to:
		(a)	Hold an intersessional consultation, in a hybrid format, in April 2023 on preparations for the consideration of outputs component of the first global stocktake, taking into account the submissions referred to in paragraph 52 above;
		(b)	Convene an intersessional in-person workshop in October 2023 to develop elements for the consideration of outputs component of the first global stocktake, to inform the work of the joint contact group.
		54.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited the high-level committee referred to in paragraph 33 of decision 19/CMA.1 to provide an update during the fifty-eighth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (June 2023) on progress in planning their high-level events.
		55.	The SBI and the SBSTA reiterated their encouragement to Parties and non-Party stakeholders to hold events, at the local, national, regional and international level, as appropriate, in support of the global stocktake.
		56.	The SBI and the SBSTA encouraged Parties to make voluntary contributions for the timely implementation of activities included in these conclusions and under the first global stocktake.
IX.	Second periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it*
(Agenda item 9)
	57.	The SBI had before it document FCCC/SB/2022/3. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 57 agenda item 10(b) in a joint contact group co-chaired by Leon Charles (Grenada) and Andrew Ferrone (Luxembourg). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to recommend to COP 27 to consider the matter taking into account the draft text on the UNFCCC website.,
X.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture*
(Agenda item 10)
	58.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 57 agenda item 7 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Monika Figaj (Poland) and Milagros Sandoval (Peru). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to recommend to COP 27 to consider these matters taking into account the draft texts on the UNFCCC website.,
XI.	Report of the Adaptation Committee*
(Agenda item 11)
	59.	The SBI had before it document FCCC/SB/2022/5 and Add.1–2. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled that COP 27 and CMA 4 had referred to the SBI and the SBSTA the consideration of the review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed that the matters would be considered under this item, together with the equally titled SBSTA 57 agenda item 3, in informal consultations co-facilitated by Pilar Bueno (Argentina) and Morgane Chiocchia (United Kingdom). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to recommend to COP 27 and CMA 4 to consider these matters on the basis of the draft text on the UNFCCC website.,
XII.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
(Agenda item 12)
	60.	The SBI had before it document FCCC/SBI/2022/18. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited a representative of the LEG to deliver a brief oral report on the work of the LEG. The SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Jens Fugl (Denmark) and Bob Natifu (Uganda). At the consultations, the draft rules of procedure of the LEG, contained in annex III to the above-mentioned document, were considered. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to recommend to COP 27 and CMA 4 to consider these matters taking into account the draft text on the UNFCCC website.,
XIII.	National adaptation plans
(Agenda item 13)
	1.	Proceedings
		61.	The SBI had before it documents FCCC/SB/2022/5, FCCC/SBI/2022/18 and FCCC/SBI/2022/19. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Jens Fugl and Pepetua Latasi (Tuvalu). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		62.	The SBI welcomed the reports for 2020–2022 on progress in the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
		63.	The SBI also welcomed the information provided by the Adaptation Committee and the LEG, through their reports prepared for the session, on gaps and needs related to the process to formulate and implement NAPs, and the implementation of NAPs.
		64.	The SBI agreed to recommend to COP 27 to consider the matter taking into account the draft text on the UNFCCC website.,
XIV.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3*
(Agenda item 14)
	65.	The SBI had before it document FCCC/SB/2022/INF.2. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 57 agenda item 4 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mattias Frumerie (Sweden) and Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to recommend to CMA 4 to consider these matters taking into account the draft text on the UNFCCC website and relevant views from Parties and groups of Parties, recognizing that the draft text would not represent consensus among Parties and further work by the CMA would be necessary to finalize the decision.
XV.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts*
(Agenda item 15)
	66.	The SBI had before it document FCCC/SB/2022/2 and Add.1–2. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 57 agenda item 5 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Lucas di Pietro (Argentina) and Cornelia Jaeger (Austria). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption by the appropriate body or bodies.,
XVI.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts*
(Agenda item 16)
	67.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 57 agenda item 6 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Lucas di Pietro and Cornelia Jaeger. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to recommend to the appropriate body or bodies to consider these matters at the session(s) held in November 2022 taking into account the informal note on the UNFCCC website.,
XVII.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism
(Agenda item 17)
	A.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network*
(Agenda sub-item 17(a))
		68.	The SBI had before it document FCCC/SB/2022/4. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 57 agenda item 11 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Stella Gama (Malawi) and Elfriede More (Austria). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI recommended draft decisions for consideration and adoption at COP 27 and CMA 4.
	B.	Linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism of the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 17(b))
		1.	Proceedings
			69.	The SBI had before it document FCCC/SBI/2022/INF.6. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Orly Jacob (Canada) and Maia Tskhvaradze (Georgia). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			70.	SBI 57 considered the progress of the Technology Executive Committee, the CTCN, the GCF and the GEF in strengthening the linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism.
			71.	The SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 58 with a view to recommending a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 28, taking into account the draft text on the UNFCCC website.
	C.	First periodic assessment referred to in paragraph 69 of decision 1/CP.21
(Agenda sub-item 17(c))
		1.	Proceedings
			72.	The SBI had before it document FCCC/SBI/2022/13. At the 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Elfriede More and Vositha Wijenayake (Sri Lanka). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			73.	The SBI welcomed the efforts of the secretariat to prepare the final report on the first periodic assessment of the effectiveness and adequacy of the support provided to the Technology Mechanism in supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement on matters relating to technology development and transfer.
			74.	It noted that the outcomes of the first periodic assessment should serve as an input to the global stocktake referred to in Article 14 of the Paris Agreement and guide improved effectiveness of and enhanced support to the Technology Mechanism in supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement.
			75.	The SBI recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at CMA 4.
	D.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer
(Agenda sub-item 17(d))
		1.	Proceedings
			76.	The SBI had before it documents FCCC/CP/2022/5 and FCCC/SBI/2022/INF.13. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Stephen Minas (Greece) and Vositha Wijenayake. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			77.	The SBI welcomed the information on progress in implementing the Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer contained in the report of the GEF to COP 27.
			78.	The SBI acknowledged the information note with updated information on the status and successes of, challenges in and lessons learned from projects undertaken through the regional climate technology transfer and finance centres and encouraged the Technology Executive Committee and the CTCN to integrate relevant lessons learned when implementing the joint work programme of the Technology Mechanism for 2023–2027.
			79.	The SBI noted with concern the challenges identified for project activities in chapter V of the report referred to in paragraph 78 above, especially the concerns raised about the African climate technology transfer and finance centre, and requested the CTCN to organize an open-ended and inclusive knowledge-sharing workshop with the African centre to be held in conjunction with the Africa regional climate week.
			80.	The SBI invited the CTCN to build on the experience of the pilot and further develop regional approaches and collaboration with regional stakeholders, including national designated entities, and collaborate with the regional centres to ensure knowledge-sharing, the leveraging of investment in climate projects and the mainstreaming of climate technologies in national policies and strategies.
			81.	The SBI welcomed the inclusion in the joint work programme of the Technology Mechanism of the consideration of how developing countries can be supported in updating their TNAs and implementing their technology action plans and TNA outcomes.
			82.	The SBI also welcomed the continued support provided by the GEF to developing countries, including 17 LDCs and SIDS, for undertaking their TNAs under the fourth TNA project.
			83.	The SBI invited the LDCs and SIDS that have not yet undertaken a TNA and plan to do so to obtain support for it under the eighth replenishment of the GEF and noted that other developing countries can make use of their national allocation under the System for Transparent Allocation of Resources, relevant elements of BTR funding, CTCN technical assistance, support under the GCF Readiness Programme and support from the Adaptation Fund to prepare or update their TNA or implement their technology action plan and TNA outcomes.
			84.	Considering that many of the climate technology activities under the Poznan strategic programme have been completed, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 61 (November 2024) with a view to taking stock of progress and successes in and lessons learned from implementing the Poznan strategic programme, and the results of the global stocktake relating to technology, with a view to recommending a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 29 (November 2024) with the aim of supporting the implementation of activities, such as those identified and prioritized in developing countries’ NDCs, NAPs, TNAs and technology action plans, and long-term strategies.
XVIII.	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund
(Agenda item 18)
	A.	Membership of the Adaptation Fund Board
(Agenda sub-item 18(a))
		85.	At its 1st meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to defer consideration of this item to SBI 58.
	B.	Fourth review of the Adaptation Fund
(Agenda sub-item 18(b))
		86.	The SBI had before it document FCCC/TP/2022/1 and relevant submissions. At the 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Diann Black-Layne (Antigua and Barbuda) and Eva Schreuder (Netherlands). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at CMP 17.
XIX.	Matters relating to capacity-building
(Agenda item 19)
	87.	The SBI had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2022/11 and FCCC/SBI/2022/14. At the 1st meeting, the SBI Chair invited a Co-Chair of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building to make a brief oral report to the SBI on behalf of the Committee. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Roberta Ianna (Italy) and Juan Carlos Monterrey Gomez. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI recommended draft decisions for consideration and adoption at COP 27 and CMA 4.
XX.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement*
(Agenda item 20)
	88.	The SBI had before it document FCCC/SB/2022/6. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 57 agenda item 12 in a contact group co-chaired by Andrei Marcu (Papua New Guinea) and Daniel Waterschoot (European Union). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to forward these matters to the COP, the CMP and the CMA for further guidance, taking into account the draft text for this agenda item, available on the UNFCCC website.,
XXI.	Gender and climate change
(Agenda item 21)
	89.	At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled that the COP had referred to the SBI the consideration of the annual report on gender composition and the synthesis report on progress in integrating a gender perspective in constituted body processes. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed that the matter would be considered under this item, together with the review of the implementation of activities under the gender action plan, in informal consultations co-facilitated by Juan Carlos Monterrey Gomez and Salka Sigurdardottir (United Kingdom).
	90.	At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to forward the consideration of the intermediate review of the implementation of activities under the gender action plan to COP 27 for further guidance, taking into account the draft text for this agenda item, available on the UNFCCC website.,
XXII.	Matters relating to Action for Climate Empowerment
(Agenda item 22)
	91.	The SBI had before it document FCCC/SBI/2022/17. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Pemy Gasela (South Africa) and Kaveh Guilanpour (Georgia). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 27 and CMA 4.
XXIII.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
(Agenda item 23)
	92.	The SBI had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2022/INF.10 and Add.1, FCCC/SBI/2022/INF.11, and FCCC/SBI/2022/INF.16. At the 1st meeting, the SBI Chair invited the Deputy Executive Secretary to introduce the item. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in a contact group chaired by Janine Felson (Belize). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI took note of the information contained in the documents prepared for this item and recommended two draft decisions for consideration and adoption at COP 27 and CMP 17.
XXIV.	Reporting and review pursuant to Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: provision of financial and technical support to developing country Parties for reporting and capacity‑building
(Agenda item 24)
	1.	Proceedings
		93.	At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled that CMA 4 referred the consideration of matters under its agenda sub-item 5(a), titled “Reporting and review pursuant to Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: provision of financial and technical support to developing country Parties for reporting and capacity-building”, to the SBI. At the same meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed that this matter would be considered under an equally titled item, included in SBI 57 agenda as item 24, in informal consultations co-facilitated by Helen Plume and Tian Wang. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		94.	The SBI welcomed the information provided by the GEF in its report to CMA 4, on:
		(a)	Operationalization of the CBIT, including its programming and implementation modalities, and the voluntary contributions pledged by several countries;
		(b)	Financial support requested, approved and provided for the preparation of BTRs by developing country Parties, including support provided through the CBIT Global Coordination Platform.
			95.	The SBI underscored the importance of the adequacy, predictability and timeliness of the support provided to developing country Parties, in particular the LDCs and SIDS, for building their institutional and technical capacity for implementing the ETF in accordance with Article 13 of the Paris Agreement, in particular for the timely submission of the first BTRs by 31 December 2024 at the latest.
			96.	The SBI noted the increase in the allocation to the climate change focal area set aside for enabling activities, including the CBIT, from USD 165 million in the seventh GEF replenishment cycle to USD 220 million in the eighth, and the scaling up of financial support for the preparation of BTRs.
			97.	The SBI also noted the efforts of the GEF to improve and streamline its application process for preparation of BTRs and highlighted the importance of continuing such efforts.
			98.	The SBI further noted the challenges that developing country Parties face in implementing the ETF in a sustainable manner, including establishment and enhancement of national reporting systems within their respective national governments.
			99.	The SBI acknowledged the importance of drawing the challenges referred to in paragraph 98 above to the attention of the GEF in providing financial support, and of the CGE in providing technical support to developing country Parties.
			100.	The SBI noted the existing support provided by various multilateral and bilateral channels to developing countries to help them meet their obligations under Article 13 of the Paris Agreement.
			101.	The SBI invited Parties and interested stakeholders to submit views by 30 April 2023, via the submission portal, on how to address the challenges referred to in paragraph 98 above.
			102.	The SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 58, taking into account the submissions referred to in paragraph 101 above, with a view to facilitating the development of sustainable institutional capacity of developing countries, in particular the LDCs and SIDS, pursuant to Article 13 of the Paris Agreement, and recommending a draft decision for consideration and adoption at CMA 5 (November 2023).
XXV.	Other matters
(Agenda item 25)
	103.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. No other matters were raised.
XXVI.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 26)
	1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
		104.	At the 3rd meeting of the SBI, on 12 November, a representative of the secretariat informed the SBI that two activities resulting from the conclusions adopted at this session require additional resources over and above the core budget for the biennium 2022–‍2023. Relevant requests for activities are contained in conclusions adopted under two SBI agenda items, including a joint SBSTA–SBI item.
		105.	Under agenda item 22, “Matters relating to Action for Climate Empowerment”, supplementary funding of EUR 889,000 will be required in 2023 to implement relevant activities of the action plan under the Glasgow work programme on Action for Climate Empowerment, including providing in the annual summary report under the Glasgow work programme information on materials, resources and findings as set out in the action plan. This activity is recurring or long-term and would therefore be funded from the core budget in future (post-2023) bienniums if approved by the appropriate governing body.
		106.	Under the joint SBI–SBSTA agenda item “Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement”, supplementary funding of EUR 1,022,000 will be required in 2023 to hold an intersessional consultation in a hybrid format and convene an intersessional in-person workshop. This activity is temporary or short-term and would therefore be funded from supplementary funds.
	2.	Closure of and report on the session
		107.	At the resumed 3rd meeting of the SBI, which was held jointly with the resumed 3rd meeting of the SBSTA, statements were made by representatives of 16 Parties, including 12 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Environmental Integrity Group; European Union and its member States; Group of 77 and China; Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; least developed countries; Like-minded Developing Countries; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by seven representatives of UNFCCC constituencies: the women and gender constituency, and business and industry, children and youth, environmental, farmers, and research and independent non-governmental organizations.
		108.	At the same meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session and to make it available to all Parties.
		109.	At the closing of the session the SBI Chair reflected on her three-year term, which was coming to an end at this session, as a rich and extraordinary experience. She pointed out that the COVID-19 pandemic posed challenges to the process but did not change the urgency of the work, and highlighted the engagement, endurance and patience of Parties and their commitment to making progress in the UNFCCC process. She thanked the SBSTA Chair for the close collaboration and the Governments of Chile, the United Kingdom and Egypt for their constructive and effective cooperation as Presidencies during her term. She then closed the session.
		
