|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBI/2015/10 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 16 July 2015  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Implementation
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its forty-second session, held in Bonn from 1 to 11 June 2015
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)		1–2	5
		II.	Organizational matters 
(Agenda item 2)		3–8	5
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		3–5	5
			B.	Organization of the work of the session		6	7
			C.	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international 
assessment and review process		7–8	7
			III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda item 3)		9–19	7
				A.	Status of submission and review of sixth national communications and 
first biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		9	7
				B.	Compilation and synthesis of sixth national communications and first 
biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		10	8
				C.	Revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications 
by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC 
reporting guidelines on national communications”		11–18	8
				D.	Outcome of the first round of the international assessment and 
review process (2014–2015)		19	9
				IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda item 4)		20–30	9
					A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not 
included in Annex I to the Convention (agenda sub-item held in abeyance)			9
					B.	Provision of financial and technical support		20–30	9
			V.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol 
(Agenda item 5)		31–46	11
			A.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism	31	11
			B.	Review of the joint implementation guidelines		32–36	11
				C.	Modalities for expediting the continued issuance, transfer and acquisition of joint 
implementation emission reduction units		37–38	12
				D.	Procedures, mechanisms and institutional arrangements for appeals against 
decisions of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism		39–42	12
			E.	Matters relating to the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol	43–46	13
			VI.	Matters relating to the least developed countries 
(Agenda item 6)		47–67	14
			VII.	National adaptation plans 
(Agenda item 7)		68–76	16
			VIII.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer 
(Agenda item 8)		77–84	17
			IX.	Capacity-building 
(Agenda item 9)		85–96	18
				A.	Capacity-building under the Convention		85–90	18
				B.	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol		91–96	19
			X.	Article 6 of the Convention 
(Agenda item 10)		97–104	19
			XI.	Impact of the implementation of response measures 
(Agenda item 11)		105–111	20
				A.	Forum and work programme		105–109	20
				B.	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol		110	21
				C.	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10		111	21
			XII.	The 2013–2015 review 
(Agenda item 12)		112–114	22
			XIII.	Gender and climate change 
(Agenda item 13)		115	22
			XIV.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings 
(Agenda item 14)		116–129	22
			XV.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters 
(Agenda item 15)		130–151	24
				A.	Budget performance for the biennium 2014–2015		130–134	24
				B.	Programme budget performance for the biennium 2016–2017		135–143	25
				C.	Continuing review of the functions and operations of the secretariat		144	26
				D.	Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement		145–151	26
			XVI.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 16)		152–157	27
				XVII.	Closure of and report on the session 
(Agenda item 17)		158–166	28
			Annexes
			I.	Summary reports on multilateral assessments at the forty-second session of the
Subsidiary Body for Implementation		30
			II.	Guiding questions to monitor and evaluate progress made in the process to formulate
and implement national adaptation plans		58
			
				
		Addendum – FCCC/SBI/2015/10/Add.1
Draft decisions forwarded for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the 
Kyoto Protocol
	Draft decision -/CP.21. Terms of reference for the intermediate review of the Doha work programme on Article 6 of the Convention
	Draft decision -/CP.21. Extension of the mandate of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group
	Draft decision -/CP.21. Programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017
	Draft decision -/CMP.11. Programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017
	Draft decision -/CMP.11. Methodology for the collection of international transaction log fees in the biennium 2016–2017
	
I.	Opening of the session
	(Agenda item 1)
	1.	The forty-second session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) was held at the World Conference Center Bonn in Bonn, Germany, from 1 to 11 June 2015.
	2.	The Chair of the SBI, Mr. Amena Yauvoli (Fiji), opened the session on Monday, 1 June, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Mr. Sidat Yaffa (Gambia) as Rapporteur, and conveyed the regrets of the Vice-Chair of the SBI, Mr. Guoshun Sun (China), who could not attend the session.
II.	Organizational matters
	(Agenda item 2)
	A.	Adoption of the agenda
		(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
		3.	At its 1st meeting, on 1 June, the SBI considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBI/2015/1).
		4.	At the same meeting, the agenda was adopted as follows, with agenda sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance:
			1.	Opening of the session.
			2.	Organizational matters:
				(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
				(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
				(c)	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process.
				3.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention:
					(a)	Status of submission and review of sixth national communications and first biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(b)	Compilation and synthesis of sixth national communications and first biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(c)	Revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications”;
					(d)	Outcome of the first round of the international assessment and review process (2014–2015).
			4.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention:
				(a)	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (agenda sub-item held in abeyance);
				(b)	Provision of financial and technical support.
			5.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol:
				(a)	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism;
				(b)	Review of the joint implementation guidelines;
				(c)	Modalities for expediting the continued issuance, transfer and acquisition of joint implementation emission reduction units;
				(d)	Procedures, mechanisms and institutional arrangements for appeals against decisions of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism;
				(e)	Matters relating to the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol.
			6.	Matters relating to the least developed countries.
			7.	National adaptation plans.
			8.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer.
			9.	Capacity-building:
				(a)	Capacity-building under the Convention;
				(b)	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol.
			10.	Article 6 of the Convention.
			11.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
				(a)	Forum and work programme;
				(b)	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol;
				(c)	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10.
			12.	The 2013–2015 review.
			13.	Gender and climate change.
			14.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings.
			15.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters:
				(a)	Budget performance for the biennium 2014–2015;
				(b)	Programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017;
				(c)	Continuing review of the functions and operations of the secretariat;
				(d)	Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement.
			16.	Other matters.
			17.	Closure of and report on the session.
		5.	At the resumed 1st meeting, on 1 June, statements were made by representatives of seven Parties, including one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China (G77 and China), one on behalf of the Umbrella Group, one on behalf of the African Group, one on behalf of the Environmental Integrity Group (EIG), one on behalf of the least developed countries (LDCs), one on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) and one on behalf of the European Union and its 28 member States. Statements were also made by representatives of indigenous peoples organizations, women and gender non-governmental organizations (NGOs), youth NGOs and environmental NGOs.
	B.	Organization of the work of the session
		(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
		6.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, at which the Chair drew attention to the proposed programme of work posted on the SBI 42 web page. In line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices, the Chair informed the SBI that he would continue to apply firm time management measures, including no official meetings being organized for the afternoon of Saturday, 6 June, in order to enhance the efficiency, timeliness and transparency of work. Also, in order to enable broad participation in the multilateral assessment (MA) working group session that was to be held on 4 and 5 June, the Chair informed delegates that no other official SBI meetings would be scheduled for those days. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to proceed on the basis of the programme of work referred to above.
	C.	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process
		(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
		7.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided by the Chair on the organization of the second MA working group session, which was to be convened on 4 and 5 June.
		8.	A summary report for each of the 24 Parties that were assessed at this session is available on the UNFCCC website on the individual Party page and is also presented in annex I.
III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
	(Agenda item 3)
	A.	Status of submission and review of sixth national communications and first biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda sub-item 3(a))
		Proceedings
			9.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.3.
	B.	Compilation and synthesis of sixth national communications and first biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda sub-item 3(b))
		Proceedings
			10.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at its 2nd meeting, on 11 June. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Fatuma Hussein (Kenya) and Ms. Helen Plume (New Zealand). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of the item at SBI 44 (May 2016).
	C.	Revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications”
		(Agenda sub-item 3(c))
		1.	Proceedings
			11.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Hussein and Ms. Plume. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			12.	The SBI continued its discussion, initiated at SBI 40, on the revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications” (hereinafter referred to as the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on NCs).
			13.	The SBI made progress on the scope of the revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on NCs, including the alignment of the tables in the guidelines with the information provided in biennial reporting common tabular format tables 5, 6(a), 6(b), 6(c), 7, 7(a), 7(b) and 9. It advanced its discussion of the revisions to the projection timeline specified in paragraph 37 of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on NCs, and noted the placeholders for future consideration of reporting elements, including the reporting on any economic and social consequences of response measures.
			14.	The SBI invited Parties to submit further views on the revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on NCs, taking into account the need to ensure consistency, to the extent possible, between the reporting requirements for biennial reports and national communications, by 1 September 2015.
			15.	The SBI requested the secretariat to revise and update the technical paper on the revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on NCs in order to reflect the views submitted by Parties. It also requested that the tables and the revised projection timeline referenced in paragraph 13 above be included in the revised and updated technical paper so as to inform further discussion at SBI 43 (November–December 2015).
			16.	In view of the progress made at this session, the SBI agreed to continue its work on the revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on NCs at SBI 43 with a view to the revised guidelines being adopted by the Conference of the Parties (COP) at its twenty-first session (November–December 2015).
			17.	The SBI recognized that if additional time beyond SBI 43 is required, owing to the technical nature of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on NCs, Parties should aim to adopt the revised guidelines by COP 22 (November 2016). In this case, the SBI requests the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBI, to organize a pre-session workshop prior to SBI 44 in order to advance the revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on NCs in 2016, and to prepare the workshop report, which will serve as input to the discussion on this matter at SBI 44.
			18.	The SBI took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 17 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of supplementary financial resources.
		D.	Outcome of the first round of the international assessment and review process (2014–2015)
			(Agenda sub-item 3(d))
			Proceedings
				19.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. Representatives of two Parties made statements. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Hussein and Ms. Plume. At the 2nd meeting, the Chair reported that the consultations did not result in any conclusions. In accordance with rules 10(c) and 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, this matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBI 43.
IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
	(Agenda item 4)
	A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance)
	B.	Provision of financial and technical support
		(Agenda sub-item 4(b))
		1.	Proceedings
			20.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it document FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.7. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Plume and Ms. Ann Gan (Singapore). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			21.	The SBI welcomed the information provided by the secretariat of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) on the financial support provided by the GEF for the preparation of biennial update reports (BURs) by Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties).
			22.	The SBI invited the GEF to continue providing detailed, accurate, timely and complete information on its activities relating to the preparation of BURs, including information on the dates of requests for funding, approval and disbursement of funds, and an approximate date of submission of BURs to the secretariat, for consideration at SBI 43.
			23.	The SBI noted with appreciation that 10 non-Annex I Parties had submitted their first BURs by December 2014 and welcomed the three additional BURs submitted between 1 January and 8 June 2015. A further 18 non-Annex I Parties are expected to submit their first BURs by 31 December 2015.
			24.	The SBI noted that, as at 9 June 2015, there were many outstanding BURs, while recognizing the challenges that non-Annex I Parties face in submitting their BURs in a timely manner. It recalled decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 41(a), which states that non-Annex I Parties, consistent with their capabilities and the level of support provided for reporting, should submit their first BURs by December 2014. The SBI encouraged non-Annex I Parties that have not submitted their first BURs to complete and submit them in a timely manner.
			25.	The SBI also noted that, as at 29 May 2015, the GEF secretariat had received 51 requests for funds from non-Annex I Parties for the preparation of their BURs, and that an umbrella programme for BURs implemented by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) seeks to support 39 additional non-Annex I Parties in preparing their first BURs.
			26.	The SBI recalled decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 41(d), through which the COP urged non-Annex I Parties that have not submitted their requests to the GEF for financial support for the preparation of their first BURs to do so in a timely manner. It also encouraged GEF agencies to continue to facilitate the preparation and submission of project proposals by non-Annex I Parties for the preparation of their BURs.
			27.	The SBI noted with appreciation the operationalization by the GEF of its Global Support Programme (GSP). It continued to encourage non-Annex I Parties to take advantage of the opportunities for technical assistance and support available under the GSP regarding the preparation of their national communications and BURs, including the requests referred to in paragraph 29 below.
			28.	The SBI recognized the contribution made by the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention in providing technical support to non-Annex I Parties through the development of updated training materials and e-learning programmes.
			29.	The SBI noted the requests from non-Annex I Parties for further technical support aimed at improving their domestic capacity to facilitate continuity in meeting reporting requirements through training on the use of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, building sustainable national greenhouse gas inventory management systems, and understanding and applying best practices relevant to the setting up of domestic measurement, reporting and verification systems. It encouraged the secretariat, in coordination with UNEP and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), to make every effort to ensure that the relevant training is made available to all non-Annex I Parties.
			30.	The SBI took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 29 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
V.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol
	(Agenda item 5)
	A.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism
		(Agenda sub-item 5(a))
		Proceedings
			31.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Karolina Attonen (Finland) and Mr. Gerald Lindo (Jamaica). At the 2nd meeting, the Chair reported that the consultations did not result in any conclusions. In accordance with rules 10(c) and 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, this matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBI 43.
	B.	Review of the joint implementation guidelines
		(Agenda sub-item 5(b))
		1.	Proceedings
			32.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2015/5, FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.1 and FCCC/TP/2015/1. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Dimitar Nikov (France) and Mr. Yaw Osafo (Ghana). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			33.	The SBI continued its consideration of the review of the guidelines for the implementation of Article 6 of the Kyoto Protocol (hereinafter referred to as the joint implementation (JI) guidelines), in accordance with decision 6/CMP.8, paragraphs 14–16.
			34.	The SBI took note with appreciation of the following documents prepared by the secretariat:
			(a)	The technical paper on opportunities for cost savings and efficiencies in JI, learning from experience with the clean development mechanism while recognizing the respective mandates of the two mechanisms;
			(b)	The synthesis report on the submissions from Parties with examples of voluntary technical approaches, designed by host Parties for their JI projects, that could assist the host Parties in achieving their quantified emission limitation or reduction commitments under the Kyoto Protocol.
			35.	The SBI also took note with appreciation of the recommendations on the review of the JI guidelines prepared by the Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee.
			36.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 43 on the basis of the draft decision text proposed by the co-facilitators of the informal consultations on this agenda sub-item contained in the annex to document FCCC/SBI/2015/L.5.
	C.	Modalities for expediting the continued issuance, transfer and acquisition of joint implementation emission reduction units
		(Agenda sub-item 5(c))
		1.	Proceedings
			37.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Nikov and Mr. Osafo. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			38.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 43 on the basis of the draft decision text contained in the annex to document FCCC/SBI/2015/L.2, with a view to recommending a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) at its eleventh session (November–December 2015).
	D.	Procedures, mechanisms and institutional arrangements for appeals against decisions of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism
		(Agenda sub-item 5(d))
		1.	Proceedings
			39.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Osafo and Mr. Kunihiko Shimada (Japan). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			40.	In accordance with the mandate set out in decision 3/CMP.6, paragraph 18, the SBI continued its discussion of the issue of procedures, mechanisms and institutional arrangements for appeals against the decisions of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism.
			41.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter on the basis of, inter alia, the co-facilitators’ draft text contained in document FCCC/SBI/2012/33/Add.1 at SBI 44.
			42.	The SBI invited Parties and admitted observer organisations to submit to the secretariat, by 1 March 2016, their views on the scope of the mechanism for appeals against decisions of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism.
	E.	Matters relating to the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol
		(Agenda sub-item 5(e))
		1.	Proceedings
			43.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.2. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations facilitated by Mr. Yuji Mizuno (Japan). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			44.	The SBI concluded its consideration of information security management in systems supporting emissions trading under the Kyoto Protocol.
			45.	The SBI welcomed the document prepared by the international transaction log (ITL) administrator and the Security Working Group established under the Registry System Administrators Forum and, on the basis of that document, agreed to request the following actions related to information security implementation in registry systems:
			(a)	The ITL administrator, in cooperation with administrators of other registry systems, is to develop, establish and maintain requirements for managing inventories related to information assets under the control of registry system administrators;
			(b)	The ITL administrator and administrators of other registry systems are to review and update the common operational procedure for the handling of security incidents in order to enable the resolution of any actual, suspected or potential breaches of confidentiality, availability or integrity of the information assets referred to in paragraph 45(a) above;
			(c)	The ITL administrator is to reassess, during the standard independent assessment report process in 2016, changes in the business continuity plans of the national registries that reported incomplete implementation of the controls contained in these plans;
			(d)	The ITL administrator is to include in its annual reports to the SBI an update on the actions referred to in paragraph 45(a–c) above.
			46.	The SBI noted that the actions called for in these conclusions can be accommodated within the ITL budget.
VI.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
	(Agenda item 6)
	1.	Proceedings
		47.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2015/6, FCCC/SBI/2015/7, FCCC/SBI/2015/8 and FCCC/SBI/2015/MISC.2. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Mamadou Honadia (Burkina Faso) and Mr. Jens Fugl (European Union). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		48.	The SBI took note of the oral report of the Chair of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG) on the implementation of the LEG work programme for 2014–2015 and expressed its appreciation to the LEG for progress made under its work programme.
		49.	The SBI welcomed the report on the 27th meeting of the LEG, held in Bangkok, Thailand, from 12 to 14 March 2015, and the report on the stocktaking meeting on the work of the LEG, held from 9 to 11 March 2015, also in Bangkok.
		50.	The SBI also welcomed the successful organization of the NAP Expo held in Bonn, Germany, on 14 and 15 April 2015 and noted its value in promoting the sharing of early experiences with the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans (NAPs).
		51.	The SBI further welcomed the successful organization of the workshop on experiences, good practices, lessons learned, gaps and needs in the process to formulate and implement NAPs by the Adaptation Committee, in collaboration with the LEG, in Bonn on 16 and 17 April 2015.
		52.	The SBI welcomed the synthesis report on the progress, need for continuation and terms of reference of the LEG prepared by the secretariat on the basis of the submissions from Parties of their views on the work of the LEG, reports of the LEG, the report on the stocktaking meeting referred to in paragraph 49 above and other relevant information.
		53.	The SBI expressed its gratitude to:
		(a)	The Government of Zambia for hosting the training workshop on NAPs for Eastern and Southern Africa in Livingstone, Zambia, from 23 to 27 February 2015;
		(b)	The UNDP office in Bangkok for hosting the meetings referred to in paragraph 49 above.
		54.	It also expressed its gratitude to the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland for financially supporting the work of the LEG.
		55.	The SBI noted with appreciation that, as at 2 June 2015, five LDCs had completed the implementation of at least one of their national adaptation programme of action (NAPA) projects.
		56.	The SBI also noted with appreciation the continued support from the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF), and that, as at 2 June 2015, of the 50 countries that had completed their NAPAs, 49 had accessed USD 905.63 million for 161 projects.
		57.	The SBI further noted with appreciation the contributions made by some Parties to the LDCF, totalling USD 929.13 million as at 31 March 2015, and encouraged other Parties to also contribute.
		58.	The SBI noted with appreciation the progress made by LDC Parties and the technical support provided by support programmes and networks on the process to formulate and implement NAPs, while noting the ongoing constraints faced by many LDC Parties in accessing financial support for the process.
		59.	The SBI noted with concern the lack of funding in the LDCF and urged Parties to contribute to it, recognizing the importance of supporting the full implementation of NAPAs in order to address urgent and immediate adaptation needs and to build capacity for medium- and long-term adaptation planning and implementation. It noted that 29 project proposals requesting USD 215 million, 10 of which support elements of the NAP process, had already been technically cleared by the GEF but were awaiting funding as at 2 June 2015.
		60.	The SBI highlighted the possibility of the LDCs using their existing national climate change plans and strategies, including NAPAs and NAPs, as strategic frameworks for engaging with the Green Climate Fund (GCF).
		61.	The SBI welcomed the LEG work programme for 2015, which includes the regional training workshops on NAPs remaining in 2015.
		62.	The SBI requested the LEG, with the assistance of the secretariat, to prepare an information paper on the NAP Expo and the regional training workshops referred to in paragraphs 50 and 61 above, respectively, with a view to capturing experiences, good practices and lessons learned in addressing adaptation in the LDCs, for consideration at 
SBI 43.
		63.	The SBI noted with appreciation the continued active engagement and collaboration of the LEG with the Adaptation Committee and other constituted bodies and programmes under the Convention and with a wide range of other relevant organizations, agencies and regional centres as well as programmes and networks supporting the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
		64.	The SBI also noted with appreciation the collaboration between the LEG and the GCF on the process to formulate and implement NAPs and encouraged the LEG to continue to collaborate with the GCF on addressing issues related to access to the GCF by the LDCs.
		65.	The SBI took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 62 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		66.	The SBI invited Parties in a position to do so to continue to provide support for the implementation of the LEG work programme.
		67.	The SBI recommended a draft decision on the extension of the mandate of the LEG for consideration and adoption at COP 21 (for the text of the draft decision, see document FCCC/SBI/2015/10/Add.1).
VII.	National adaptation plans
	(Agenda item 7)
	1.	Proceedings
		68.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it document FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.6. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Honadia and Ms. Beth Lavender (Canada). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		69.	The SBI welcomed the report on the workshop on experiences, good practices, lessons learned, gaps and needs in the process to formulate and implement NAPs, held in Bonn on 16 and 17 April 2015.
		70.	It also welcomed the oral update of the Co-Chairs of the Adaptation Committee and took note of the report on the 27th meeting of the LEG, which provide information on the consideration by the Adaptation Committee and the LEG, in collaboration with the GCF, of how to best support developing country Parties in accessing funding from the GCF for the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
		71.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to both the LEG and the Adaptation Committee for their engagement with the GCF, in considering how to best support developing country Parties in accessing funding from the GCF for the process to formulate and implement NAPs, and invited them to continue to collaborate with the GCF, including in relation to the readiness programme of the GCF.
		72.	It invited the Adaptation Committee and the LEG to provide information on how they have responded to the invitation referred to in paragraph 71 above in their reports.
		73.	The SBI noted with concern the lack of funds in the LDCF and the Special Climate Change Fund, including for the process to formulate and implement NAPs, and the challenges faced by developing countries in preparing for accessing funding from the GCF.
		74.	It noted that the LDCs and other developing country Parties can access funding through the readiness programme of the GCF for activities related to the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
		75.	The SBI initiated its consideration of options for enhancing reporting related to the process to formulate and implement NAPs and agreed to continue that consideration at SBI 44 taking into account relevant information.
		76.	The SBI considered the monitoring and evaluation of progress made in the process to formulate and implement NAPs. It decided to continue its consideration of the matter at SBI 43, including on the basis of the notes contained in annex I to document FCCC/SBI/2015/L.14, with a view to recommending a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
VIII.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer
	(Agenda item 8)
	1.	Proceedings
		77.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.4 and FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.5. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize) and Ms. Elfriede More (Austria). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		78.	The SBI welcomed the report of the GEF on the progress made in carrying out the Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer.
		79.	The SBI also welcomed the collaboration between the Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN) and the regional technology transfer and finance centres supported by the GEF under the Poznan strategic programme. It invited the GEF to provide more detailed information on its ongoing collaboration with the CTCN in its future progress reports.
		80.	The SBI also invited the GEF to provide financial support to non-Annex I Parties that have not yet conducted their technology needs assessments (TNAs) under the Poznan strategic programme so that they may do so, in accordance with decision 11/CP.17, paragraph 2. The SBI recalled its invitation to the GEF at SBI 40 to provide support for the implementation of the results of TNAs, including technology action plans and project ideas.
		81.	The SBI noted that the CTCN may provide technical support to non-Annex I Parties, at their request, to facilitate the implementation of TNAs conducted or updated under the Poznan strategic programme, in line with its functions decided at COP 16.
		82.	The SBI welcomed the interim report of the Technology Executive Committee (TEC) on the evaluation of the Poznan strategic programme, undertaken with the aim of enhancing the effectiveness of the Technology Mechanism, and looked forward to the final report of the TEC on the findings of the evaluation, which will be provided to the COP through SBI 43.
		83.	The SBI encouraged those providing inputs to the evaluation of the Poznan strategic programme to consider how the programme may provide support for technologies for adaptation and take into account gender responsiveness.
		84.	The SBI also encouraged the TEC, in evaluating the Poznan strategic programme, to continue to consult Parties, the GCF, GEF implementing agencies and other relevant entities on how to enhance the effectiveness of the Technology Mechanism.
IX.	Capacity-building
	(Agenda item 9)
	A.	Capacity-building under the Convention
		(Agenda sub-item 9(a))
		1.	Proceedings
			85.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2015/4 and Add.1, FCCC/SBI/2015/9 and FCCC/SBI/2015/MISC.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Bubu Jallow (Gambia) and Mr. Shimada. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			86.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of the terms of reference for the third comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries at SBI 43 on the basis of the draft text contained in annex I to document FCCC/SBI/2015/L.15.
			87.	The SBI continued, but did not conclude, its consideration of capacity-building for developing countries under the Convention. It agreed to continue its consideration of the matter at SBI 43 on the basis of the draft decision text contained in annex II to document FCCC/SBI/2015/L.15, with a view to recommending a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
			88.	The SBI requested the secretariat to organize a workshop back-to-back with a session of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action (ADP) to further discuss potential ways to enhance capacity-building activities as expressed by Parties at this session.
			89.	The SBI also requested the secretariat to prepare a report on the workshop mentioned in paragraph 88 above for consideration at SBI 43.
			90.	The SBI requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	B.	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol
		(Agenda sub-item 9(b))
		1.	Proceedings
			91.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2015/4 and Add.1, FCCC/SBI/2015/9 and FCCC/SBI/2015/MISC.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Jallow and Mr. Shimada. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			92.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of the terms of reference for the third comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries at SBI 43 on the basis of the draft text contained in the annex to document FCCC/SBI/2015/L.16.
			93.	The SBI continued, but did not conclude, its consideration of capacity-building for developing countries under the Kyoto Protocol. It agreed to continue its consideration of the matter at SBI 43 with a view to recommending a draft decision for consideration and adoption at CMP 11.
			94.	The SBI requested the secretariat to organize a workshop back-to-back with a session of the ADP to further discuss potential ways to enhance capacity-building activities as expressed by Parties at this session.
			95.	The SBI also requested the secretariat to prepare a report on the workshop mentioned in paragraph 94 above for consideration at SBI 43.
			96.	The SBI requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
X.	Article 6 of the Convention
	(Agenda item 10)
	1.	Proceedings
		97.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. Representatives of two Parties made statements. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations facilitated by Mr. Albert Magalang (Philippines). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		98.	The SBI welcomed the progress made by some Parties in the implementation of all elements of Article 6 of the Convention.
		99.	The SBI acknowledged the success of the 3rd in-session Dialogue on Article 6 of the Convention and expressed its gratitude to Parties, admitted observer organizations and other stakeholders for sharing experiences and exchanging ideas, good practices and lessons learned regarding climate change education and training and international cooperation on these matters.
		100.	The SBI invited Parties that have not yet done so to designate a national focal point for Article 6 of the Convention and to inform the secretariat accordingly.
		101.	The SBI also invited Parties, admitted observer organizations and other stakeholders to submit to the secretariat, by 19 February 2016, their feedback on the organization of the 3rd in-session Dialogue on Article 6 of the Convention and their views on the agenda for the 4th in-session Dialogue, which will focus on public access to information, public participation and public awareness, as well as on international cooperation on these matters.
		102.	The SBI welcomed the proposals from Parties, admitted observer organizations and other stakeholders on the intermediate review of the progress made in the implementation of the Doha work programme on Article 6 of the Convention.
		103.	The SBI further invited Parties, admitted observer organizations and other stakeholders to submit to the secretariat, by 19 February 2016, information on the steps they have taken to implement the Doha work programme, such as efforts to consider the linkages between Article 6 activities, implementation of policies and measures to mitigate and adapt to climate change, and on emerging gaps and needs, as well as recommendations on further steps for improving the effective implementation of the Doha work programme.
		104.	The SBI recommended a draft decision on the intermediate review of the implementation of the Doha work programme for consideration and adoption at COP 21 (for the text of the draft decision, see document FCCC/SBI/2015/10/Add.1).
XI.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
	(Agenda item 11)
	A.	Forum and work programme
		(Agenda sub-item 11(a))
		1.	Proceedings
			105.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item jointly with agenda sub-item 7(a) of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) in a contact group co-chaired by the Chair of the SBI and the Chair of the SBSTA, Ms. Lidia Wojtal (Poland). The SBI also agreed to consider this agenda sub-item at this session jointly with SBI agenda sub-items 11(b) and (c).
			106.	At the 2nd meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that Mr. Eduardo Calvo Buendia (Peru) and Mr. Delano Verwey (Netherlands) had helped him and the Chair of the SBSTA to facilitate the informal consultations on this agenda sub-item. At the same meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			107.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the draft decision text contained in the annex to decision 20/CP.20 on the forum and work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures, with a view to preparing a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
			108.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties to submit to the secretariat, by 21 September 2015, their views on the further elaboration of the work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures and the modalities for its implementation as detailed in the draft decision text contained in the annex to document FCCC/SB/2015/L.2.
			109.	The SBI and the SBSTA decided to consider the draft decision text referred to in paragraph 108 above at their forty-third sessions with a view to recommending a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
	B.	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol
		(Agenda sub-item 11(b))
		Proceedings
			110.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item jointly with SBI agenda sub-item 11(a) and SBSTA agenda sub-item 7(a). At the same meeting, the SBI also agreed that the Chair of the SBI would undertake consultations with interested Parties on how to take up this agenda sub-item at SBI 43. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue at SBI 43 consideration of how to take up this agenda sub-item.
	C.	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10
		(Agenda sub-item 11(c))
		Proceedings
			111.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item jointly with SBI agenda sub-item 11(a) and SBSTA agenda sub-item 7(a). At the same meeting, the SBI also agreed that the Chair of the SBI would undertake consultations with interested Parties on how to take up this agenda sub-item at SBI 43. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue at SBI 43 consideration of how to take up this agenda sub-item.
XII.	The 2013–2015 review
	(Agenda item 12)
	1.	Proceedings
		112.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it document FCCC/SB/2015/INF.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item jointly with SBSTA agenda sub-item 6(b) in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Leon Charles (Grenada) and Ms. Gertraud Wollansky (Austria). At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		113.	The SBSTA and the SBI, in accordance with decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 166, and in response to the mandate given at SBSTA 41 and SBI 41, began their consideration of the report of the structured expert dialogue (SED), referred to in SBSTA 41 and SBI 41 conclusions, which includes a compilation and a technical summary of the summary reports on the meetings of the SED and the submissions from Parties on the 2013–2015 review.
		114.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to continue their consideration of this matter at SBSTA 43 (November–December 2015) and SBI 43.
XIII.	Gender and climate change
	(Agenda item 13)
	Proceedings
		115.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. A presentation was made by a representative of the secretariat and the SBI took note of the information provided. The Chair informed the SBI of the venue of the in-session workshop on gender-responsive climate policy with a focus on mitigation and technology development and transfer, organized as part of the Lima work programme on gender.
XIV.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings
	(Agenda item 14)
	1.	Proceedings
		116.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings and had before it document FCCC/SBI/2015/2. A representative of one Party made a statement. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in a contact group chaired by the Chair of the SBI. At the same meeting, the Chair invited a representative of the Government of France to make a statement. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below. At the same meeting, the Chair invited a representative of the Government of Morocco to make a statement.
	2.	Conclusions
		117.	The SBI took note of document FCCC/SBI/2015/2 and welcomed the views expressed by Parties therein.
		118.	The SBI expressed its gratitude to the Government of France for offering to host COP 21 and CMP 11 in Paris, France, from Monday, 30 November, to Friday, 11 December 2015. It took note with appreciation of the preparations and efforts that the Government of France and the secretariat are undertaking to ensure the success of COP 21 and CMP 11.
		119.	The SBI recommended that arrangements be made to organize the high-level segment of COP 21 and CMP 11 building on earlier efforts on time management and to ensure a timely closure of the United Nations Climate Change Conference to be held in Paris. In this context, meetings of the COP and the CMP will be convened in the morning of 11 December for the adoption of decisions and conclusions. The SBI also recommended that the delivery of statements by representatives of Parties, intergovernmental organizations and NGOs in the joint meetings of the COP and the CMP during the high-level segment be kept concise and respect the recommended time limits established for previous sessions.
		120.	The SBI took note of the evolving circumstances in the negotiations and the need to be flexible in the organization of COP 21 and CMP 11. Given the political significance of the outcomes of the Paris Conference, the SBI invited the President Designate of COP 21 and CMP 11, in consultation with the secretariat and the Bureau, to finalize the details of the arrangements for COP 21 and CMP 11.
		121.	The SBI requested the secretariat to make this information on the final arrangements for COP 21 and CMP 11 available to Parties and observers as soon as possible in order to allow them to effectively plan for the sessions.
		122.	The SBI took note of the initiative undertaken by the COP 20 and CMP 10 Presidency, the incoming COP 21 and CMP 11 Presidency and the secretariat on the Lima–Paris Action Agenda, which showcases the actions of non-State actors. It encouraged the secretariat to engage with observers, including civil society, the private sector and other non-State actors, when organizing expert discussions on matters that are relevant to their experience in and expertise on climate change action.
		123.	The SBI underlined the importance of the principles of openness, transparency and inclusiveness in making arrangements for high-level engagement at the Paris Conference.
		124.	The SBI took note of the views expressed by Parties on the possible elements of the provisional agendas for COP 21 and CMP 11.
		125.	The SBI also took note of the information provided by the Government of Morocco on the status of its plans to host COP 22 and CMP 12 in Marrakesh. The SBI looks forward to the Government of Morocco and the secretariat providing additional information to the Bureau on arrangements for ensuring that all logistical, technical, legal and financial elements for hosting the sessions are available, in conformity with United Nations General Assembly resolution 40/243. The SBI requested the secretariat to report on the status of preparations and arrangements for COP 22 and CMP 12 at SBI 44.
		126.	The SBI noted that, in keeping with the principle of rotation among regional groups, the President of COP 23 and CMP 13 would come from the Asia-Pacific States. It invited Parties to come forward with offers to host COP 23 and CMP 13.
		127.	The SBI recommended the following dates for the sessional periods in 2020 for consideration at COP 21:
		(a)	First sessional period: Monday, 1 June, to Thursday, 11 June;
		(b)	Second sessional period: Monday, 9 November, to Friday, 20 November.
		128.	The SBI welcomed the views expressed by Parties on the frequency and organization of sessions of the COP, the CMP and their subsidiary bodies. It recognized the need to take into account the important role of implementation after 2015 as well as the implications of any change in the frequency and organization of sessions for post-2015 work programmes and mandates. In this regard, the SBI requested the secretariat to provide information for consideration at SBI 44 on a 10-year calendar for the organization of the intergovernmental process, including any budgetary considerations and implications, covering the following scenarios:
		(a)	Annual COP/CMP sessions alternating between a host country and the seat of the secretariat;
		(b)	Biennial COP/CMP sessions, including the option of alternating between a host country and the seat of the secretariat.
		129.	The SBI also welcomed the views expressed by Parties on adjusting the timing of the election of the President. It agreed to further consider at SBI 44 the issue of the frequency and organization of sessions and the issue of adjusting the timing of the election of the President taking into account the scenarios outlined in document FCCC/SBI/2015/2 and the information requested in paragraph 128 above.
XV.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
	(Agenda item 15)
	A.	Budget performance for the biennium 2014–2015
		(Agenda sub-item 15(a))
		1.	Proceedings
			130.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and 2nd meeting and had before it document FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.8. A representative of one Party made a statement. At its resumed 1st meeting, the Chair proposed preparing draft conclusions on this matter, with the assistance of the secretariat and in consultation with interested Parties. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			131.	The SBI took note of the information relating to the status of contributions as at 15 May 2015.
			132.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to Parties that had paid their indicative contributions to the core budget and their fees for the ITL on time, and particularly to those Parties that had made voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process and the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities.
			133.	The SBI expressed its concern over the contributions that remained outstanding and urged those Parties that had not yet paid their contributions to do so as soon as possible.
			134.	In consideration of the heavy workload and meeting schedule leading up to COP 21 and CMP 11, the SBI requested Parties to contribute accordingly to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process and the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities in order to promote the effective and inclusive participation of all developing country Parties in the ongoing processes.
	B.	Programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017
		(Agenda sub-item 15(b))
		1.	Proceedings
			135.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and 2nd meeting and had before it document FCCC/SBI/2015/3 and Add.1–3. A representative of one Party made a statement.
			136.	At the resumed 1st meeting, the Executive Secretary made a statement and the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in a contact group chaired by the Chair of the SBI. It also agreed to establish a spin-off group facilitated by Mr. Nikov to discuss the methodology for the collection of ITL fees for the biennium 2016–2017. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			137.	The SBI considered the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017 and the budget for the ITL for the biennium 2016–2017.
			138.	It recommended that COP 21 approve a core programme budget of EUR 54,648,484 for the biennium 2016–2017.
			139.	The SBI recommended that the COP authorize the Executive Secretary to implement decisions that may be taken at COP 21 for which provisions are not made under the approved budget by using voluntary contributions and, to the extent possible, resources available under the core budget.
			140.	The SBI authorized the Executive Secretary to notify Parties of their 2016 contributions, based on the budget amount shown in paragraph 138 above, after taking into account the special annual contribution from the Host Government of EUR 766,938.
			141.	The SBI also authorized the Executive Secretary to notify the Parties concerned of their annual fee for 2016 for the connection of their national registry to, and use of, the ITL and for the related activities of the ITL administrator.
			142.	The SBI agreed to recommend a draft decision on the programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017 for consideration and adoption at COP 21, a draft decision on the programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017 as it applies to the Kyoto Protocol and the budget for the ITL for consideration and adoption at CMP 11, and a draft decision on the methodology for the collection of ITL fees for consideration and adoption at CMP 11 (for the texts of the draft decisions, see document FCCC/SBI/2015/10/Add.1).
			143.	The SBI requested the secretariat to provide an overview of possible structures and bodies within the United Nations system that may inform Parties in making the budget process more efficient and transparent, for consideration by Parties at SBI 44.
	C.	Continuing review of the functions and operations of the secretariat
		(Agenda sub-item 15(c))
		Proceedings
			144.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting. The SBI agreed to consider this item further at SBI 44.
	D.	Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement
		(Agenda sub-item 15(d))
		1.	Proceedings
			145.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and 2nd meeting. The Chair invited a representative of the Host Government of the secretariat and the Executive Secretary to make statements. A representative of one Party made a statement. At the resumed 1st meeting, the Chair proposed drafting conclusions on this agenda sub-item, with the assistance of the secretariat and in consultation with interested Parties. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			146.	The SBI took note of the information provided by the representative of the Host Government of the secretariat that the construction of the new World Conference Center Bonn has been completed, and expressed its satisfaction with the excellent facilities that the new conference centre provided during the forty-second sessions of the subsidiary bodies.
			147.	The SBI thanked both the Host Government and the host city of Bonn for their special efforts and investments with regard to the completion of the conference centre, including the repeated special financial contributions by the Host Government for the sessions of the ADP held in Bonn. It reinforced its encouragement to the Host Government to continue to provide support for the operation of the World Conference Center Bonn as a permanent forum for the UNFCCC intergovernmental process at the seat of the secretariat. In addition, it looked forward to the hotel facilities adjacent to the conference centre being opened as soon as possible so as to improve the availability of commercial accommodation and office space for delegations.
			148.	In accordance with decisions 27/CP.19 and 25/CP.18, the SBI reiterated its request to the secretariat to maximize the combined use of the secretariat’s office facilities and the conference centre for UNFCCC sessions and meetings in order to reduce costs and further enhance the services available at the seat of the secretariat.
			149.	The SBI noted the information in the reports by the representative of the Host Government and the Executive Secretary that the design of an extension building on the United Nations Campus, which is to enable the entire secretariat to be located at the same premises, is making good progress, with works starting in January 2016 and completion scheduled within three years.
			150.	The SBI welcomed the continued collaboration between the Host Government, the secretariat and other relevant stakeholders on issues such as meeting and office facilities as well as enhanced services and information for meeting participants. It encouraged the Host Government and the secretariat to maintain this process of close and regular consultations.
			151.	The SBI requested the secretariat to continue to update Parties on the UNFCCC website about these and other aspects of the implementation of the Headquarters Agreement and invited the Host Government and the Executive Secretary to report to SBI 46 (May 2017) on progress made.
XVI.	Other matters
	(Agenda item 16)
	Proceedings
		152.	The SBI considered this item at its resumed 1st meeting and 2nd meeting. Representatives of two Parties made statements. At the resumed 1st meeting, the issue of the finalization of the nominations for membership of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts was raised, as well as the issue of the consideration of the 3rd review of the Adaptation Fund. At the same meeting, the Chair proposed undertaking general consultations on those issues and reporting back on the outcome thereof to the SBI at its closing meeting.
		153.	At the 2nd meeting, the Chair reported on the outcome of his consultations, as detailed in paragraphs 154-157 below.
		154.	The issue of the finalization of the nominations to the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism was raised at the Bureau meeting of 3 June. The Bureau appointed the COP Vice-President, Mr. Cheik Sylla (Senegal), to consult on this issue as part of the overall consultations on nominations for elections that he had been designated to conduct by the COP President.
		155.	During his consultations on elections with the Chairs of all regional groups and constituencies held on 9 June, Mr. Sylla requested all groups to urgently finalize and submit the pending nominations by the closing of the sessions in Bonn.
		156.	The SBI Chair confirmed that all nominations for non-Annex I Parties and Parties included in Annex I to the Convention have now been submitted and thanked all Parties for their nominations, as well as Mr. Sylla for his efforts in securing them. Arrangements for convening the first meeting of the Executive Committee can now be made.
		157.	The Chair informed the SBI that, in accordance with decision 2/CMP.10, the SBI is requested to initiate the 3rd review of the Adaptation Fund at SBI 44 and report back to CMP 12 on the outcomes of its deliberations.
XVII.	Closure of and report on the session
	(Agenda item 17)
	1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
		158.	At the 2nd meeting, a representative of the secretariat provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during the session in accordance with rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
		159.	The secretariat informed Parties that a number of activities had arisen from the negotiations at the session that call for the provision of more support by the secretariat and, therefore, require additional resources over and above the core budget for 2015 and the proposed budget for 2016–2017, as detailed below.
		160.	Under agenda sub-item 3(c), the secretariat has been requested to organize a pre-session workshop prior to SBI 44 and to revise and update a technical paper on the revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on NCs. The estimated cost amounts to EUR 58,000.
		161.	Under agenda sub-item 4(b), the secretariat has been requested to make every effort to provide training on the use of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories to all non-Annex I Parties. The estimated cost amounts to EUR 1,359,000, of which EUR 160,000 will be needed in 2015.
		162.	Under agenda sub-items 9(a) and (b), the secretariat has been requested to organize a workshop back-to-back with an ADP session to discuss how to enhance capacity-building, with a report thereon to be prepared for consideration at SBI 43. The estimated cost amounts to EUR 47,000.
		163.	The SBI has given the secretariat further mandates in addition to those referred to above. However, the corresponding resource requirements will be absorbed by available resources. The above-stated amounts are preliminary and based on the currently available information. Overall, additional funds amounting to EUR 1,464,000 will be needed to cover activities in the current year and the 2016–2017 biennium.
		164.	In addition to the administrative and budgetary implications of the requests made by the SBI at the session, the secretariat noted the implications of the outcome of the session for the biennial programme budget recommended by the SBI for adoption by the COP and the CMP. Parties could not agree to cover the increased resource requirements that the Executive Secretary had proposed for inclusion in the core budget and the secretariat urged Parties in a position to do so to provide supplementary funding to meet the additional requirements for: additional meetings of the constituted bodies, as the core budget can in the biennium 2016–2017 accommodate only two meetings of each body rather than three; reviews of greenhouse gas inventories, to cover in-country reviews and reviews of a higher number of BURs; strengthening the Adaptation programme in the area of loss and damage, the Adaptation Committee and the NAP process; organizing side events and exhibits; and institutional strengthening, in particular information technology (IT) security and other key IT and communication functions.
	2.	Closure of and report on the session
		165.	At its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session and to make it available to all Parties.
		166.	Closing statements were made by representatives of seven Parties, including on behalf of the African Group of Negotiators, EIG, G77 and China, the Umbrella Group, AOSIS, the LDCs and the European Union and its member States. Statements were also made by representatives of indigenous peoples organizations, environmental NGOs, women and gender NGOs, business and industry NGOs and youth NGOs. The Chair thanked Parties for their support and closed the session.
			
			
Annex I
	[English only]
	Summary reports on multilateral assessments at the forty-second session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation
		Background
			1.	The Conference of the Parties, by decision 1/CP.16, decided that developed country Parties should enhance the reporting in their national communications and submit biennial reports on their progress in achieving emission reductions. It also established a new process under the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) – international assessment and review (IAR) – that aims to promote the comparability of efforts among all developed country Parties. The first round of the IAR process is to be conducted during the period 2014–2015.
			2.	According to the modalities and procedures for IAR specified in annex II to decision 2/CP.17, the multilateral assessment (MA), being part of the IAR process, is to be conducted for each developed country Party at a working group session of the SBI, with the participation of all Parties. The aim of the MA is to assess each Party’s progress in implementation towards the achievement of emission reductions and removals related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction target.
			3.	The second MA working group session was convened during SBI 42 under the chairmanship of Mr. Amena Yauvoli (Fiji), the SBI Chair, and was preceded by a three-month period of questions and answers; in the first month, any Party may submit written questions to the Party being assessed, which may respond to the questions within the remaining two months. A summary report for each of the 24 Parties that were assessed at SBI 42 is presented below. The reports are also available on the UNFCCC website on the individual Party pages.
			4.	In closing the MA for each Party, the SBI Chair reminded the Party that it can submit any other observations on its MA process within two months of the working group session, and that they will form part of its Party record for the MA. The SBI Chair thanked all Parties and the secretariat for the successful MA working group session.
			
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Australia
		1.	The first MA of Australia took place on 4 June 2015. Australia was represented by Mr. Peter Woolcott, Ambassador for the Environment.
		2.	Questions for Australia had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil, China, the European Union (EU), New Zealand, Saudi Arabia, Switzerland and the United States of America. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Australia can be found on the IAR web page for Australia.
		3.	Mr. Woolcott made an opening presentation, summarizing Australia’s progress in implementation towards the achievement of emission reductions and removals related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. He also provided an update on Australia’s recent policy changes concerning emission reductions. According to Mr. Woolcott, Australia is on track to meet its 2020 target, which is 5 per cent below 2000 emission levels by 2020. Based on its 2015 national greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory report, Australia overachieved its target for the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol by 129 million tonnes (Mt) of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2 eq). In addition, Australia has advanced towards its 2020 target through policy interventions, such as the improvement in energy efficiency and the facilitation of changes of the economy. A comparison of gross domestic product (GDP) and population growth with emission intensity of GDP and emissions per capita shows that Australia has decoupled its emissions from GDP and population growth.
		4.	In his presentation, Mr. Woolcott elaborated on the implementation of the Emissions Reduction Fund (ERF), the central piece of the 2014 Direct Action Plan, which replaced the former carbon tax. The ERF is the main mechanism for achieving the 2020 target and it aims to tackle economy-wide mitigation potential. The first auction under the ERF was held in April 2015, with over 47 Mt CO2 eq abatement contracted. A safeguard mechanism is planned to be put in place to ensure that emission reductions purchased by the Government under the ERF are not offset by significant rises in emissions elsewhere in the economy. Apart from the ERF, policies and measures (PaMs) in place to meet Australia’s 2020 target include the amended Renewable Energy Target, energy efficiency measures and the National Energy Productivity Plan.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Brazil, China, Fiji, Japan, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (United Kingdom), and the United States. These questions were on: the mitigation potential of the ERF; lessons learned from the first auction under the ERF and companies’ reaction to the ERF; the mechanism to monitor the effectiveness of the ERF; the rigour of the safeguard mechanism and key issues raised during the public consultation stage of the mechanism; the conditionality and ambition of Australia’s 2020 target; the role of updated GHG emission projections in policymaking; difficulties in estimating policy effects by gas; the Renewable Energy Target; and the vehicle emission standard as part of the policy package towards 2020. Questions were also raised in relation to Australia’s assessment of the social and economic consequences of response measures. In response, Australia provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Australia.
		
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Belgium
		1.	The first MA of Belgium took place on 3 June 2015. Belgium was represented by Mr. Peter Wittoeck, Head of Climate Change Section, Federal Directorate-General for the Environment.
		2.	Questions for Belgium had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil, Canada, China, New Zealand and the United States. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Belgium can be found on the IAR web page for Belgium.
		3.	Mr. Wittoeck made an opening presentation, summarizing Belgium’s progress towards the achievement of its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. Emissions, excluding those from the land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) sector, decreased by 18.5 per cent between 1990 and 2012 despite growth in GDP and population over the same period. The emission intensity of the economy has thus decreased over this period, indicating a certain decoupling of emissions from economic growth. According to Mr. Wittoeck, Belgium is expected to achieve its target for the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol.
		4.	Mr. Wittoeck presented Belgium’s target for 2020 for sectors outside the EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) as well as the common EU target for EU ETS as contained in the EU 2020 climate and energy package. Belgium has put in place a range of policies and measures in order to achieve its 2020 target, including for the renewable energy, building and transport sectors. Its National Climate Policy is formulated using a bottom-up approach – it is based on regional and federal climate policies.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Algeria, Brazil, China, India and the United States. The questions were on: shares of transport and commercial sectors in Belgium’s GHG emissions; the inclusion of emissions from international aviation in the 2020 targets; the key policies and measures for the energy sector, in particular as related to the transport and commercial sectors; policies and measures for the agriculture and waste sectors, including those planned to increase mitigation in the agriculture sector; and the quantification of impacts of mitigation policies and measures with the greatest contribution to the achievement of Belgium’s 2020 targets and their main focus in the future. Clarification was also requested on how Belgian domestic energy policy fits into the EU energy policy, division of mitigation effort between federal and regional levels, and how the Belgian National Climate Policy takes into account federal and regional policies. Belgium was furthermore asked to clarify how it plans to create incentives for other EU member States to undertake greater mitigation efforts in view of the downward trend in its own emissions since 2005. In response, Belgium provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Belgium.
		
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Bulgaria
		1.	The first MA of Bulgaria took place on 4 June 2015. Bulgaria was represented by Ms. Veneta Borikova from the Ministry of Environment and Water.
		2.	Questions for Bulgaria had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil and China. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Bulgaria can be found on the IAR web page for Bulgaria.
		3.	Ms. Borikova made an opening presentation, summarizing Bulgaria’s progress towards the achievement of its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. Emissions, excluding those from the LULUCF sector, decreased by nearly 41 per cent between 1988 and 2012 mainly owing to structural changes stemming from the transition from a centrally-planned economy to a market economy.
		4.	Ms. Borikova presented Bulgaria’s individual targets for 2020 for sectors outside the EU ETS and renewable energy set under the EU climate and energy package. Bulgaria has put in place a range of policies and measures in order to achieve its 2020 targets as part of its Third National Action Plan on Climate Change, including for the energy, household and services, waste and transport sectors. According to preliminary estimates, Bulgaria is expected to over-achieve its 2013 targets for sectors not covered by the EU ETS (non-ETS sectors), as well as its targets for renewable energy and biofuels under the EU climate and energy package.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from China and the Marshall Islands. Bulgaria was requested to clarify whether it would consider the possibility of raising its target under the EU climate and energy package in order to allow the EU to raise its target for 2020 in view of the significant projected reductions in national emissions compared with the 1990 levels. Information was also sought regarding the relationship of Bulgaria’s Climate Change Mitigation Act with its Energy Act, Renewable Energy Act, Energy Efficiency Act and National Climate Action Plan. Another question related to the time frame of Bulgaria’s plans for increased use of cleaner energy sources in place of coal for power generation in relation to the time frame for its planned move towards a more electrified public transport system. In response, Bulgaria provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Bulgaria.
		
		
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Canada
		1.	The first MA of Canada took place on 4 June 2015. Canada was represented by Ms. Louise Métivier, Environment Canada.
		2.	Questions for Canada had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil, China, the EU, New Zealand, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Switzerland and the United States. Canada submitted written answers after the deadline. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Canada can be found on the IAR web page for Canada.
		3.	Ms. Métivier made an opening presentation, summarizing Canada’s national circumstances, the impacts of climate change felt in Canada, the institutional arrangements it has made with regard to its climate change policy, and its GHG emission trends and projections. She also summarized the steps Canada has taken towards the achievement of its quantified economy-wide emission reduction target. According to Ms. Métivier, the implementation of current PaMs will contribute a reduction of 130 Mt of CO2 eq towards Canada’s 2020 target, which is 17 per cent below 2005 emission levels by 2020, and the Party will require an additional reduction of 116 Mt CO2 eq to reach the target. A comparison of GHG emission growth with the emission intensity of GDP shows that Canada has achieved some level of decoupling of its emissions from GDP growth.
		4.	Ms. Métivier emphasized that Canada’s sector by sector regulatory approach focuses on the two most polluting sectors, transportation and coal-fired electricity production. Transportation emits about 25 per cent of Canada’s total emissions; therefore, Canada intends to develop more stringent GHG emission standards for road transportation. Emissions from coal-fired electricity production are addressed by federal and provincial measures phasing out coal-fired electricity generation over the long term. In addition, Ms. Métivier noted that Canada puts great effort into research, development and demonstration for CO2 storage and sequestration and that the mitigation efforts of provinces and territories are making a significant contribution to meeting the national target.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Australia, Brazil, China, the EU, Japan, New Zealand, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sweden and the United States. These questions were on: the use of units from LULUCF and the use of international market-based mechanisms to achieve the target; ways to deliver the required 116 Mt CO2 eq reductions to achieve the 2020 target; the effects of current and additional PaMs; uncertainties in the estimation of emissions/removals in the LULUCF sector; new regulations in the electricity and transportation sectors; regulations addressing fluorinated gases; mapping the differences in the classification of economic sections versus the sectoral classification used by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; scale of investments in clean technologies; and the roles of provinces and territories in the implementation of the climate change policy. Questions were also raised in relation to the Party’s assessment of the social and economic consequences of response measures. In response, Canada provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Canada.
		
		
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of the Czech Republic
		1.	The first MA of the Czech Republic took place on 4 June 2015. The Czech Republic was represented by Mr. Pavel Zamyslicky from the Ministry of the Environment.
		2.	Questions for Czech Republic had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil, Canada and China. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by the Czech Republic can be found on the IAR web page for the Czech Republic.
		3.	Mr. Zamyslicky made an opening presentation, summarizing the Czech Republic’s progress in the implementation of its emission reduction and removal commitments related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. Under the Convention, the Czech Republic participates in the EU joint economy-wide emission reduction target to achieve a 20 per cent reduction in emissions by 2020 compared with the 1990 (base year) level. The target for the EU and its member States is formalized in the EU climate and energy package, which includes the EU ETS and the effort-sharing decision (ESD). Under the ESD, the Czech Republic has a target to limit emission growth to 9 per cent above the 2005 level by 2020 (+9 per cent) from sectors covered by the ESD. In line with the EU approach to its target, the Czech Republic does not include emissions or removals from the LULUCF sector in defining its quantified economy-wide target. The ESD also includes binding renewable energy goals and non-binding energy efficiency goals for each member State. The Czech Republic has a binding renewable energy goal to achieve a 13 per cent share of renewable energy in its gross total final energy consumption. Its non-binding energy efficiency goal is to achieve additional energy savings of 13.27 TWh by 2020.
		4.	The Czech Republic’s total GHG emissions excluding emissions and removals from LULUCF decreased by 31.5 per cent between 1990 and 2011, with projections showing a continuous decrease in emissions up to 2020. In order to meet its 2020 targets, the Czech Republic is currently drafting the Climate Protection Policy, which will include the implementation of the EU climate and energy package, as well as its emission reduction targets for 2020 under the Convention. In addition, the Czech Republic is preparing the State Energy Policy, which includes a 30-year outlook for identifying energy management objectives. Across the EU, it is expected that the market mechanism of the EU ETS will guarantee that emissions from sectors under this scheme will achieve the 2020 target of 21 per cent below the 2005 level. Under the ESD, the Czech Republic is expected to meet its emission reduction target as well as its renewable energy and energy efficiency goals.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Brazil, China and the United States. The questions received focused on: whether the Czech Republic is considering increasing its emission reduction target for 2020 since the current target has already been met; what, if any, market-based mechanisms will be used to achieve its targets; whether the Czech Republic is considering adopting additional PaMs to address its emissions not covered by the EU ETS; what PaMs addressing the implementation of new nuclear energy and other renewable energy sources (RES) are in place, and whether or not there are interim targets prior to 2020 for the implementation of such sources. In response, the Czech Republic provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Czech Republic.
			
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Estonia
		1.	The first MA of Estonia took place on 4 June 2015. Estonia was represented by Mr. Meelis Münt from the Ministry of the Environment.
		2.	Questions for Estonia had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil and China. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Estonia can be found on the IAR web page for Estonia.
		3.	Mr. Münt made an opening presentation, summarizing Estonia’s progress in the implementation of its emission reduction and removal commitments related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. He elaborated on the national circumstances of Estonia as a small economy and member State of the EU. Estonia is committed to contribute to the emission reduction target of the EU under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol. Under the ESD, Estonia has a target of limiting the growth of its emissions in the non-ETS sectors to 11 per cent by 2020 compared with the 2005 level (+11 per cent). He explained that the target of the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol had been overachieved, with an emission reduction of 52.8 per cent in 2012 compared with the 1990 level. This was partly due to a decoupling of economic growth and GHG emissions from 1990 to 2012, when GDP, after an initial decline in the 1990s, almost doubled, while emissions halved. Although emissions decreased in all sectors, the most significant reductions could be observed in the energy and agriculture sectors. However, in 2012, energy remained the most significant sector in terms of GHG emissions, with a share of 87.9 per cent of the total.
		4.	Successful implementation of national PaMs has led to a transformation of the energy supply structure towards an increase in the share of renewables to 25 per cent in gross final energy consumption in 2014; limitations on oil shale extraction to 20 million t/year; an efficiency improvement in the use of oil shale; investments in climate change mitigation and energy efficiency measures of more than EUR 700 million; and environmental taxation reaching 2.8 per cent of GDP. In addition, several strategies and plans are under preparation to achieve the Party’s long-term targets, including the Estonian Low Carbon Road Map up to 2050, the Estonian National Development Plan of the Energy Sector up to 2030, the National Development Plan for the Use of Oil Shale 2016–2020 and the national Climate Change Adaptation Strategy up to 2030. Thus, Estonia projects further significant emission reductions and expects to fulfil its commitments for 2020.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from China and the Republic of Korea. The questions were on emission levels and trends in the energy and LULUCF sectors, and the specific measures to reduce GHG emissions in the industrial processes and agriculture sectors. In response, Estonia provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Estonia.
			
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Germany
		1.	The first MA of Germany took place on 4 June 2015. Germany was represented by Mr. Martin Weiß from the Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation, Building and Nuclear Safety.
		2.	Questions for Germany had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Australia, Brazil, China, New Zealand, Saudi Arabia and the United States. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Germany can be found on the IAR web page for Germany.
		3.	Mr. Weiß made an opening presentation, summarizing Germany’s progress in the implementation of its emission reduction and removal commitments related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. He explained that Germany, as a member State of the EU, has a target under the ESD to reduce its emissions in the non-ETS sectors by 14 per cent by 2020 compared with the 2005 level. In addition, Germany has a national target of reducing its GHG emissions by 40 per cent by 2020 compared with the 1990 level. He also described the targets for Germany’s energy transition plan for the period up to 2050, which aims to reduce GHG emissions, increase the share of renewable energy and improve energy efficiency. GHG emissions are estimated to be 27 per cent lower in 2014 compared with 1990, a reduction that was achieved despite the economic growth of 39 per cent in the same period. All sectors contributed to these emission reductions, with highest absolute reductions in the energy sector and highest relative reductions in the waste sector as a result of the banning of landfilled waste.
		4.	The main PaMs that contributed to the reduction are the Renewable Energy Act, energy taxes, transport efficiency measures, building efficiency measures and corresponding support programmes and all EU-wide mitigation PaMs. In addition to emission reductions, the successful implementation of these PaMs led to a significant creation of jobs in the areas of renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies. According to the latest projections, Germany can achieve an emission reduction of 33–34 per cent by 2020 with existing PaMs. To close the gap to its national target of a 40 per cent reduction, the Federal Cabinet adopted the Climate Action Programme 2020 in December 2014. The programme is also considered an important milestone towards reaching its 2050 target of an emission reduction of 80–95 per cent, as it outlines the process for the elaboration of the Climate Policy Plan 2050, to be developed by 2016. The development of the Climate Policy Plan will be underpinned by a broad dialogue and participation process during 2015–2016 and will focus on long-term climate targets.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Brazil, China, Fiji, Japan, Maldives, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia and the United States. The questions were on: clarification regarding Germany’s national target and the target under the ESD, including their comparability and the potential effects of a more ambitious national target on other EU member States; progress made in the optimization of the introduction of RES, including feed-in tariffs and the types of incentives for private households for installing solar energy generation devices; the PaMs to incentivize and protect investments for energy transformation; specifics of the PaMs affecting the waste sector; PaMs affecting shipping emissions; the status of implementation of PaMs in the Climate Action Programme; drivers of emission trends in recent years; the projected share of renewables and other energy sources in the energy mix by 2020 and the Party’s experiences in comparing the national GHG emission inventory with external data. Questions were also raised in relation to Germany’s assessment of the social and economic consequences of response measures. In response, Germany provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Germany.
		
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Greece
		1.	The first MA of Greece took place on 4 June 2015. Greece was represented by Mr. Ioannis Ziomas, Advisor to the Minister of Environment, Energy and Climate Change.
		2.	Questions for Greece had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil, China and the United States. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Greece can be found on the IAR web page for Greece.
		3.	Mr. Ziomas made an opening presentation, summarizing Greece’s progress in the implementation of its emission reduction and removal commitments related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. Under the Convention, Greece is committed to the EU joint economy-wide emission reduction target to achieve a 20 per cent reduction in emissions by 2020 compared with the 1990 (base year) level. The target for the EU and its member States is formalized in the 2020 EU climate and energy package, which includes the EU ETS and the ESD. Under the ESD, Greece has an emission reduction target of 4 per cent below the 2005 level by 2020 for the sectors covered by the ESD. In line with the EU approach to its target, Greece does not include emissions or removals from LULUCF sector in defining its quantified economy-wide emission reduction target. The ESD also includes binding renewable energy goals and non-binding energy efficiency goals for each EU member State. Greece has a binding renewable energy goal of achieving an 18 per cent share of renewable energy in its gross total final energy consumption, which it voluntarily increased to 20 per cent. Regarding energy efficiency, Greece has a non-binding goal to limit its final energy consumption to 18.4 Mtoe by 2020.
		4.	To meet its 2020 targets, Greece has various PaMs in place, including the PaMs for the promotion of RES and the promotion of natural gas. The PaM for the promotion of RES includes Greece’s national renewable energy action plan and a feed-in tariff for incentivizing the installation of renewable energy. Under the PaM for the promotion of natural gas, Greece undertook a number of actions from 1996 to 2013, such as maintaining no excise duty, developing natural gas infrastructure and encouraging fuel switching. Greece’s emissions and removals for 2012 were estimated to be 5.8 per cent above the 1990 level excluding LULUCF, with the projections showing a slight decrease in emissions by 2020 compared with the 1990 level. Across the EU, it is expected that the market mechanism of the EU ETS will guarantee that emissions from the sectors covered by the EU ETS will be in line with the 2020 target of 21 per cent below the 2005 level. Under the ESD, Greece is expected to meet its emission reduction target as well as its renewable energy and energy efficiency goals.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Brazil, China, India and the United States. The questions focused on: what domestic PaMs are in place to fulfil Greece’s 2020 target for the non-ETS sectors; whether the economic situation in Greece has the potential to affect its climate change actions; whether Greece will continue to modify its feed-in tariff rates to encourage renewable energy deployment and use; how Greece plans to address the rising emissions from the transport sector; and Greece’s use of biodiesel and whether it will consider the use of bioethanol. In response, Greece provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Greece.
			
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Hungary
		1.	The first MA of Hungary took place on 4 June 2015. Hungary was represented by Mr. Akos Lukacs, Head of Climate Policy Department, Ministry of National Development.
		2.	Questions for Hungary had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil and China. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Hungary can be found on the IAR web page for Hungary.
		3.	Mr. Lukacs made an opening presentation, addressing the questions received prior to the working group session and the answers provided. He described the historical and projected impacts of climate change in Hungary for the period 1901–2100. In addition, he explained the emission trends in Hungary for the period 1990–2012. He then elaborated on the national circumstances of Hungary, which experienced a significant reduction (by 36 per cent during 1990–2012) in GHG emissions owing to the collapse of the central planning economic system. In the period after 1992, Hungary demonstrated a significant economic restructuring, reduction in energy intensity and decoupling of economic development from the emission trajectory.
		4.	Mr. Lukacs explained that, as a EU member State, since 2004 Hungary has been committed to achieving a joint unconditional quantified economy-wide emission reduction target of 20 per cent below the 1990 level by 2020. This target is formalized in the EU climate and energy package, which includes the EU ETS and the ESD. Under the ESD, Hungary has committed to a target of limiting its emissions growth to 10 per cent compared with the 2005 level by 2020. In 2012, emissions from sectors covered by the ESD were already 18 per cent below the 2005 level. Hungary appears to be on track to meet its target and is likely to overachieve it.
		5.	Regarding the progress made towards achieving the 2020 targets, it was acknowledged that a number of PaMs have been put in place by Hungary to address its joint EU commitments under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol. Hungary’s major PaMs include its National Climate Change Strategies, the Decarbonisation Roadmap, the Green Investment Scheme and the measures to promote the use of RES, energy efficiency improvements and an increase in the use of biofuels.
		6.	The opening presentation was followed by questions from Algeria and China on the following: the projected GHG emissions by 2020; PaMs included in the emission projection scenario for the period ending in 2020; and institutional arrangements and financial provisions made for the implementation of those PaMs. In response, Hungary provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Hungary.
		
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Iceland
		1.	The first MA of Iceland took place on 4 June 2015. Iceland was represented by Mr. Hugi Ólafsson, Department of Oceans, Water and Climate, Ministry for the Environment and Natural Resources.
		2.	Questions for Iceland had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil, Canada, China, the EU, New Zealand and the United States. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Iceland can be found on the IAR web page for Iceland.
		3.	Mr. Ólafsson made an opening presentation, summarizing Iceland’s progress in the implementation of its emission reduction and removal commitments related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. Mr. Ólafsson highlighted Iceland’s unique GHG emission profile, where emissions from industrial processes are the major contributor to the total national GHG emissions without emissions from LULUCF. The total GHG emissions increased by 26 per cent from 1990 to 2012.
		4.	Mr. Ólafsson noted that Iceland, jointly with the EU, participates in efforts to reach the economy-wide emission reduction target for the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol of reducing GHG emissions by 20 per cent by 2020 compared with the 2005 level. Iceland intends to contribute to the achievement of this target by participating in the EU ETS and by implementing mitigation actions in the non-ETS sectors. The mitigation action plan that Iceland has put in place aims to reduce national GHG emissions, and in particular GHG emissions from non-ETS sectors, by 20 per cent by 2020 compared with the 2005 level. Iceland has identified significant mitigation potential in afforestation and revegetation as well as in the transport and fisheries sectors.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from China and India. These questions were on the PaMs targeted at the reduction of GHG emissions from heavy industry and research on hydrogen vehicles. In response, Iceland provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Iceland.
	
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Ireland
		1.	The first MA of Ireland took place on 4 June 2015. Ireland was represented by Ms. Petra Woods, Assistant Principal Officer, Climate Policy Section, Department of the Environment, Community and Local Government.
		2.	Questions for Ireland had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil, China and New Zealand. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Ireland can be found on the IAR web page for Ireland.
		3.	Ms. Woods made an opening presentation, summarizing Ireland’s progress in implementation towards the achievement of emission reductions and removals related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets.
		4.	Ms. Woods presented Ireland’s target under the Convention as a contribution to the quantified economy-wide emission reduction target of the EU and its member States to reduce GHG emissions by 20 per cent by 2020 compared with the 1990 level. In this context, some 27 per cent of Ireland’s GHG emissions are covered and regulated by the EU ETS, with no specific target for Ireland but with an overall and decreasing cap set at the EU level to achieve an absolute emission reduction in the covered sectors of 21 per cent relative to the 2005 level by 2020. In addition, Ireland has a target for the non-ETS sectors to reduce GHG emissions by 20 per cent relative to the 2005 level.
		5.	In her presentation, Ms. Woods highlighted that Ireland is making progress in its contribution to the joint EU emission reduction target, including through the possible use of units from market-based mechanisms under the Convention. Key PaMs put in place to achieve Ireland’s targets include: a carbon tax, in place since 2009; private car taxation based on CO2 emissions, in place since 2008; feed-in tariffs for renewable energy; improved building standards; and afforestation and improved land management. In addition, Ireland is focusing on agricultural research since the agriculture sector is responsible for about 45 per cent of Ireland’s GHG emissions from the non-ETS sectors.
		6.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Brazil, India and New Zealand. The questions were on: the quantification of the effects of Ireland’s PaMs; Ireland’s plans to use clean development mechanism (CDM) credits to comply with its targets and whether it restricts the purchase of CDM credits to specific developing countries; and Ireland’s smarter travel policy in the context of reducing GHG emissions from the transport sector. In response, Ireland provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Ireland.
			
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Japan
		1.	The first MA of Japan took place on 4 June 2015. Japan was represented by Mr. Hideaki Mizukoshi, Deputy Director-General, International Cooperation Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
		2.	Questions for Japan had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China, the EU, New Zealand, Saudi Arabia, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Japan can be found on the IAR web page for Japan.
		3.	Mr. Mizukoshi made an opening presentation, summarizing Japan’s progress in the implementation of its emission reduction and removal commitments related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets.
		4.	Mr. Mizukoshi presented Japan’s GHG emission trends by sector and by gas and explained how they are linked to changes in national circumstances, more specifically the Great East Japan Earthquake, which led to the shutdown of Japan’s 48 nuclear power stations. He also explained how changes in national circumstances modified the trend in electricity supply sources, the energy consumption pattern and the GHG emission intensity of the economy.
		5.	Furthermore, Mr. Mizukoshi reported that Japan achieved its emission reduction target for the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol using removals by forests and other carbon sinks, as well as units from mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol. He then presented Japan’s quantified economy-wide GHG emission reduction target for 2020 and its underlying assumptions, followed by emission projections by sector and by gas for up to 2020. He explained the main PaMs on which Japan relies to reduce emissions (the Basic Environment Law and Basic Environment Plan, and the Act on Promotion of Global Warming Countermeasures) and presented the joint crediting mechanism that Japan plans to use to achieve its 2020 target.
		6.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Fiji, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom and the United States. The questions were on: Japan’s revision of its 2020 target (3.8 per cent below the 2005 emission level) and how Japan will ensure that the target will not be weakened; Japan’s participation in the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol; civil-society actions, a low-carbon society and regional development; Japan’s plans for the future use of its nuclear energy production capacity; Japan’s strategy for reducing emissions from shipping; the estimated quantitative mitigation effects of Japan’s PaMs and the PaMs that are expected to contribute the most to reducing emissions; and the joint crediting mechanism (the rationale behind it, how credits would be shared among Parties, and the independent nature of the verification of, and accounting rules for, the mechanism). Questions were also raised in relation to the Party’s assessment of the social and economic consequences of its response measures. In response, Japan provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Japan.
	
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Liechtenstein
		1.	The first MA of Liechtenstein took place on 5 June 2015. Liechtenstein was represented by Ms. Heike Summer, Office of Environment.
		2.	Questions for Liechtenstein had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil, China, the EU and the Netherlands. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Liechtenstein can be found on the IAR web page for Liechtenstein.
		3.	Ms. Summer made an opening presentation, summarizing Liechtenstein’s progress in the implementation of its emission reduction and removal commitments related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. She outlined the national circumstances of Liechtenstein, which is a very small country with small and medium-sized enterprises and an export-oriented economy. She explained that, although its impact on global emissions is insignificant, Liechtenstein takes its commitments regarding climate change seriously. Liechtenstein’s economy-wide emission reduction target corresponds to a 20 per cent emission reduction by 2020 compared with the 1990 level. Although Liechtenstein experienced significant economic and population growth, by 230 and 25 per cent, respectively, between 1990 and 2012, the emission level in 2012 was slightly below the level in 1990.
		4.	Given that Lichtenstein’s energy sector contributed 84 per cent of its total GHG emissions in 2012, Liechtenstein’s PaMs are targeted mainly at that sector. The most important supporting legislation includes: the Emissions Trading Act, which stipulates Liechtenstein’s participation in the EU ETS; the Energy Efficiency Act, which regulates financial support for energy efficiency measures and measures to increase the share of RES; and the Carbon Dioxide Act. A new version of the National Climate Strategy is expected by the end of 2015. In addition, Liechtenstein has been investing in photovoltaic installations since 2008, resulting in an installed capacity increase from 1,170 MWh in 2009 to 15,550 MWh in 2014. Other measures that are specific to the national circumstances of Liechtenstein include the commissioning of a wood-fired power station and a steam pipeline from a waste incineration plant in neighbouring Switzerland. Regarding forests, Ms. Summer explained that wooded area comprises 41 per cent of Liechtenstein’s total area and that most of the forest is protected forest with provisions that prohibit deforestation.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Brazil, China, the Netherlands and New Zealand. The questions related to: Liechtenstein’s plans to use units from market-based mechanisms to achieve its emission reduction targets; additional measures planned to achieve its targets; the relationship between its target under the Convention and that under the Kyoto Protocol; the implementation status and expected effect of its infrastructure measures relating to railways; and the contribution of Liechtenstein’s mitigation actions to the observed trend in the emission intensity of its economy. In response, Liechtenstein provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Liechtenstein.
			
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Lithuania
		1.	The first MA of Lithuania took place on 5 June 2015. Lithuania was represented by Ms. Stasile Znutiene, Ministry of Environment.
		2.	Questions for Lithuania had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by China. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Lithuania can be found on the IAR web page for Lithuania.
		3.	Ms. Znutiene made an opening presentation, summarizing Lithuania’s progress in implementation towards the achievement of emission reductions and removals related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. GHG emissions excluding the LULUCF sector in Lithuania in 2012 showed a decrease of 55.6 per cent compared with the 1990 level, while GDP increased by 25 per cent over the same period, indicating a decoupling of GHG emissions from economic growth. According to Ms. Znutiene, Lithuania overachieved its emission reduction target for the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol.
		4.	Ms. Znutiene presented Lithuania’s 2020 targets at a disaggregated level, covering its targets under the EU ETS and for sectors outside the EU ETS, as well as targets for renewable energy, biofuels in transport and improvements in energy efficiency. According to historical data and current GHG emission projections, Lithuania is on track to meet its targets. By 2012 energy consumption in Lithuania had reduced by almost 5 per cent compared with the 2009 level, while nearly 21.7 per cent of the total energy consumed came from RES, against the target of 23 per cent by 2020. For the non-ETS sectors, Lithuania is on track to meet its 2020 target with the use of additional measures. Key PaMs are in place to ensure the achievement of Lithuania’s 2020 targets, including the overarching National Strategy for Climate Change Management Policy for the period 2013–2050, the Action Plan to operationalize the Strategy for the period 2013–2020, and sector-specific PaMs, as well as related economic instruments and financial support mechanisms.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Brazil, China, India and the Republic of Korea. The questions were on: Lithuania’s further plans and policies to reduce emissions from the transport and agriculture sectors; the key drivers for the 56 per cent decrease in GHG emissions by 2012 compared with the 1990 level; the main reasons for the sharp decrease in GHG emissions during the period 1990–1992; the coverage of tariff subsidies as an economic instrument; and the development of RES, including the institutional mechanism in place and specific policies on biofuel. In response, Lithuania provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Lithuania.
			
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Malta
		1.	The first MA of Malta took place on 5 June 2015. Malta was represented by Ms. Simone Borg, Ambassador of the Ministry for Sustainable Development, the Environment and Climate Change, and Ms. Claire Qoul from the same ministry.
		2.	Questions for Malta had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil and China. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Malta can be found on the IAR web page for Malta.
		3.	Ms. Borg made an opening presentation, summarizing Malta’s progress in implementation towards the achievement of emission reductions and removals related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. She elaborated on the national circumstances of Malta, which are key to explaining the emission profile of Malta and the country’s limited potential in the development of RES. The GHG emission intensity decreased by 56 per cent in 2012 compared with the 1990 level, while national GDP per capita increased by 260 per cent, indicating a decoupling of GHG emissions from economic growth in Malta.
		4.	Ms. Qoul presented Malta’s target for 2020 in the context of the EU climate and energy package, with an emphasis on Malta’s emission reduction target for sectors outside the EU ETS. As a member State of the EU, Malta has a target under the ESD to limit the growth of its emissions in the non-ETS sectors by 5 per cent by 2020 compared with the 2005 level. Despite the limited mitigation potential in Malta, the existing PaMs in the transport, agriculture and waste sectors are projected to produce mitigation effects that will keep Malta on track to meet its 2020 target for sectors outside the EU ETS. In addition, Ms. Qoul elaborated on the Party’s PaMs in electricity generation, which will make a major contribution to the overall GHG emission reduction in Malta in the lead-up to 2030.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Algeria, Botswana and China. These questions were on the limited potential for the development of large-scale and centralized RES and of distributed RES, and the drivers of the decrease in GHG emissions during 2015–2016. A point was also raised on Malta’s financial support for the efforts of developing countries to tackle climate change. In response, Malta provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Malta.
		
		
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Monaco
		1.	The first MA of Monaco took place on 5 June 2015. Monaco was represented by Mr. Patrick Rolland, Department of the Environment.
		2.	Questions for Monaco had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil, China, the EU and the Netherlands. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Monaco can be found on the IAR web page for Monaco.
		3.	Mr. Rolland made an opening presentation, summarizing Monaco’s progress in the implementation of its emission reduction and removal commitments related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. He explained the national circumstances of Monaco, which is a very small country and a net importer of energy. Energy is the main source of GHG emissions in Monaco, contributing more than 90 per cent of its total emissions and originating in equal shares from waste incineration, buildings and transport. Since 2000 a gradual decrease in emissions has been observed, which led to emissions in 2012 being 13 per cent lower than the base year level, compared with its target of an 8 per cent emission reduction for the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol. The main PaMs contributing to the emission decrease include: a cap on the annual waste capacity of the waste incineration plant; urban renewal; the banning of domestic fuel boilers in new buildings; and the clean mobility policy.
		4.	Regarding its mitigation targets under the Convention, Monaco is committed to reducing its emissions by 30 per cent by 2020 and by 80 per cent by 2050 compared with the 1990 level, and to achieving carbon neutrality by 2050. LULUCF is not accounted for as it comprises only 0.04 per cent of Monaco’s total annual emissions. In addition to its climate commitments, Monaco is also committed to increasing energy efficiency in buildings by 20 per cent, to achieving a 20 per cent share of RES in its final energy production and to keeping electricity consumption stable by 2020. To achieve those targets, Monaco implemented its Energy and Climate Action Plan. According to its GHG emission projections, meeting its targets by 2020 will not be ensured by domestic emission reductions alone. Hence, Monaco is currently defining and implementing additional PaMs to achieve its 2020 and longer-term targets, including: the prevention of waste production and the renewal of the waste treatment facility; the promotion of clean vehicles, soft mobility and infrastructure for intra-urban logistics; and, in buildings, the gradual substitution of fossil fuels for renewable energy along with energy efficiency measures.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Brazil, China, India, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea and the United Republic of Tanzania. The questions related to: PaMs to reduce emissions from transport; PaMs to increase the share of biofuels; subsidies for domestic households; measures to reduce electricity consumption, also targeting the import of electricity; emission trends in the most recent years; Monaco’s participation in activities related to reducing emissions from international aviation; and how emission reduction efforts in Monaco are influenced by its dependency on international and cross-border cooperation. In response, Monaco provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Monaco.
	
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Norway
		1.	The first MA of Norway took place on 5 June 2015. Norway was represented by Mr. Peer Stiansen, Senior Adviser, Ministry of Climate and Environment.
		2.	Questions for Norway had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil, Canada, China, the EU, New Zealand, Switzerland and the United States. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Norway can be found on the IAR web page for Norway.
		3.	Mr. Stiansen made an opening presentation, summarizing Norway’s progress in implementation towards the achievement of emission reductions and removals related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets.
		4.	Under the Convention, Norway made a commitment to reduce its GHG emissions by 30 per cent by 2020 compared with the 1990 level. This target will be reached by Norway through its commitment for the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol, with average annual emissions over the period 2013–2020 projected to be at 84 per cent of the 1990 level. Mr. Stiansen highlighted Norway’s long-term objective to become a low-emission society and reach carbon neutrality by 2050 (2030 if part of an ambitious new global climate agreement).
		5.	In his presentation Mr. Stiansen outlined that Norway is on track to achieve its emission reduction target under the Convention. Achieving it will require enhanced domestic efforts as well as the use of units from market-based mechanisms under the Convention, both by purchasing assigned amount units and certified emission reductions/emission reduction units through the EU ETS and by purchasing CDM credits through the Norwegian purchase programme.
		6.	With regard to Norway’s key domestic PaMs, Mr. Stiansen stated that Norway is building its climate change policy based on a comprehensive set of PaMs, with some 80 per cent of its emissions being already subject to fiscal and economic instruments (carbon taxes and/or emissions trading). Most notable in the Norwegian policy mix are CO2 taxes in the transport sector and the offshore petroleum sector, equivalent taxes on hydrofluorocarbons/perfluorocarbons, and the EU ETS, which covers more than 50 per cent of Norway’s domestic emissions. In addition, Mr. Stiansen emphasized the importance of advancing CO2 capture and storage technologies for achieving Norway’s long-term goal of reaching carbon neutrality.
		7.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Brazil, China, the EU, Fiji, India, Japan, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, Samoa, South Africa, Switzerland and the United States. These questions were related to: success factors and the quantification of the effects of PaMs in Norway, in particular relating to fiscal and economic instruments; the application of renewable energies in the energy mix in the energy and transport sectors; the Norwegian purchase programme for CDM credits, its volume and its purchase criteria; and emissions and removals from the land sector. In response, Norway provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Norway.
			
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Poland
		1.	The first MA of Poland took place on 5 June 2015. Poland was represented by Ms. Sylwia Waśniewska, Institute of Environmental Protection.
		2.	Questions for Poland had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil, China, Saudi Arabia, Switzerland and the United States. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Poland can be found on the IAR web page for Poland.
		3.	Ms. Waśniewska made an opening presentation, summarizing Poland’s progress in the implementation of its emission reduction and removal commitments related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. GHG emissions in Poland had decreased by 29 per cent by 2012 compared with the base year level. Thus, Poland’s emissions are well below its target for the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol, which corresponds to an emission reduction of 6 per cent compared with the base year level. While emissions decreased, GDP increased significantly over the same period, signalling a decoupling of GDP from emission growth, owing to economic and technological changes and a significant drop in the emission intensity of Poland’s energy use. Poland is committed to contributing to the target of the EU under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol of a 20 per cent reduction in emissions by 2020 compared with the 1990 level. In accordance with the ESD, Poland has a target to limit the growth in its emissions from the non-ETS sectors to 14 per cent by 2020 compared with the 2005 level (+14 per cent). In addition, Ms. Waśniewska explained Poland’s targets regarding the share of renewables in its final energy consumption, the share of biofuels in transport fuel, and energy efficiency.
		4.	According to its GHG emission projections, Poland expects emission levels that are 32 per cent lower in 2020 and 36 per cent lower in 2030 than the base year level, with emissions from energy and agriculture expected to decrease the most. Also, emissions from the non-ETS sectors are expected to stay well below the target trajectory, reflecting the target under the ESD for 2020. Thus, Poland expects to meet its emission reduction targets with domestic measures only. Ms. Waśniewska presented the key elements of the Polish climate policy, including its main strategies, the Energy Policy of Poland until 2030, the Renewable Energy Sources Act and the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan. In addition, she explained that the energy policy is currently being updated. It will be extended to 2050 and will be published in 2016. She further explained that the National Programme for the Development of a Low-Emission Economy, which aims to identify key areas for emission reductions, will be published in 2015.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Australia, Brazil, China, the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia and the United States. Questions were raised regarding: the envisaged shares of different energy sources including nuclear energy in Poland’s final energy consumption by 2020 and 2030 according to the new energy policy; whether some of the PaMs included in the new energy policy are expected to show a mitigation effect before 2020; the effect of Poland’s PaMs; specific PaMs targeting emissions from coal use; the economic feasibility of CO2 capture and storage in Poland; PaMs in the non-ETS sectors; and Poland’s use of units from market-based mechanisms to achieve its targets. Questions were also raised in relation to Poland’s assessment of the social and economic consequences of its response measures. In response, Poland provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Poland.
	
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Romania
		1.	The first MA of Romania took place on 5 June 2015.Romania was represented by Ms. Alina Boldea from the Directorate General for European Affairs and International Relations.
		2.	Questions for Romania had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil and China. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Romania can be found on the IAR web page for Romania.
		3.	Ms. Boldea made an opening presentation, summarizing Romania’s progress in the implementation of its emission reduction and removal commitments related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. Under the Convention, Romania participates in the EU joint economy-wide emission reduction target to achieve a 20 per cent reduction in emissions by 2020 compared with the 1990 (base year) level. The target for the EU and its member States is formalized in the EU climate and energy package, which includes the EU ETS and the ESD. Under the ESD, Romania has a target of limiting emission growth to 19 per cent above the 2005 level by 2020 (+19 per cent) from sectors covered by the ESD. In line with the EU approach to its target, Romania does not include emissions or removals from the LULUCF sector in defining its quantified economy-wide target. The ESD also includes binding renewable energy goals and non-binding energy efficiency goals for each member State. For Romania, it specifies a binding renewable energy goal of a 24 per cent renewable energy share in its gross total final energy consumption. Regarding energy efficiency, Romania has a non-binding goal to achieve 30.32 Mtoe of primary energy consumption by 2020.
		4.	The key policy framework related to climate change in Romania is the National Strategy for Climate Change 2013–2020, which addresses the achievement of Romania’s national objectives and greenhouse gas emission targets for 2020, as well as the adaptation measures needed to allow society and ecosystems to adapt to climate change. Specifically, the National Strategy takes into account relevant EU policies, such as the EU climate and energy package referred to in paragraph 5 above. Romania’s total GHG emissions excluding emissions and removals from LULUCF decreased by 49.5 per cent between 1990 and 2011, with projections showing an emission increase up to 2020. Across the EU, it is expected that the market mechanism of the EU ETS will guarantee that emissions from sectors under this scheme (mainly large point sources such as power plants and industrial facilities) will achieve the 2020 target of 21 per cent below the 2005 level. Under the ESD, Romania is expected to meet its emission reduction target as well as its renewable energy and energy efficiency goals.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from China and the Republic of Korea. The questions were related to the drivers of Romania’s projected increase in GHG emissions and the impact of the EU ETS, energy efficiency and renewable energy deployment on emission reductions. In response, Romania provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Romania.
	
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of the Russian Federation
		1.	The first MA of the Russian Federation took place on 5 June 2015. The Russian Federation was represented by Ms. Dinara Gershinkova, Deputy Head of Special and Scientific Programmes, Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring
		2.	Questions for the Russian Federation had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil, China, the EU, New Zealand, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Switzerland and the United States. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by the Russian Federation can be found on the IAR web page for the Russian Federation.
		3.	Ms. Gershinkova made an opening presentation, summarizing the Russian Federation’s progress towards the achievement of its emission limitation and reduction commitment related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. Ms. Gershinkova initially referred to the questions received prior to the working group session and the answers provided. She then described how the target for the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol has been overachieved by a large margin, in particular owing to the adoption of legislation for energy efficiency improvement and renewable energy development and the results delivered by these policies. Ms. Gershinkova emphasized the observed decoupling of emission growth from economic growth in the country since 2000, which is also a result of increased energy efficiency and the structural economic changes that occurred in the Russian Federation.
		4.	Ms. Gershinkova also provided details of the Russian Federation’s target under the Convention, which corresponds to the limitation of emissions to a level of no more than 75.0 per cent of the 1990 level by 2020. She described the action plan for 2014–2017 adopted by the Government containing economy-wide measures that support the achievement of this target, such as State regulations on GHG emissions in various economic sectors, including carbon market mechanisms, and indicated that the LULUCF sector is not included in the target. She further elaborated on PaMs in the LULUCF sector, highlighting the importance of this sector and its contribution to addressing climate change in the Russian Federation, and the implementation of a wide range of measures for the sector for the period 2013–2020.
		5.	Ms. Gershinkova indicated that the Russian Federation is on track to achieve its target under the Convention, which is supported by different emission projection scenarios developed by independent groups. In the “with additional measures” scenario, which involves measures such as CO2 capture and storage, the Russian Federation would achieve a level of GHG emissions corresponding to 66.9 per cent of the 1990 level, which is below the 75.0 per cent specified in the target. She also mentioned that in different emissions scenarios for the period 2010–2050, the net CO2 removals by forests in the Russian Federation decrease gradually. Finally, Ms. Gershinkova referred to the Russian Federation’s submission on 31 March 2015 of its intended nationally determined contribution, which aims to allow the country to move forward on the path of low-carbon development compatible with the long-term objective of the Convention to stay below the 2 °C increase in the global average temperature.
		6.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Australia, Brazil, China, the EU, Germany, India, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia and South Africa. These questions were on: the actions taken to reverse the trend of growing emissions in recent years; the list of quantitative details of the measures with the greatest mitigation potential; quantitative estimates of mitigation effects of domestic PaMs and the intended use of Kyoto Protocol units in achieving the 2020 target; the drivers for the increase in net removals in the LULUCF sector since 1994 and relevant actions; the information on the action plan 2014–2017 and its key measures to meet the 2020 target. Further questions were on: the PaM put in place to achieve the target of reducing the energy intensity of the economy by 12 per cent by 2020 compared with the 2007; the programmes implemented and the specific consideration of new technologies in the Russian Federation to increase the share of renewable energy in road transportation by up to 35 per cent by 2030 and the share of renewable energy in electricity production by up to 4.5 per cent by 2020; the differences in the role of local governments and the central government in the reduction of GHG emissions; the contribution of energy efficiency improvements as the major driver to the total emission reductions in the country; and the road map or time schedule for applying additional carbon pricing policies or measures, such as carbon markets and carbon taxation, and whether these will be implemented before or after 2020.
		7.	There were specific questions on reporting, such as the limited reporting on the assessment of the mitigation impact of the key PaMs and their aggregated effect in the biennial report. Questions were also raised in relation to the Party’s assessment of the social and economic consequences of response measures. In response, the Russian Federation provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for the Russian Federation.
			
		
	
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Slovakia
		1.	The first MA of Slovakia took on 5 June 2015. Slovakia was represented by Ms. Helena Princova from the Ministry of the Environment.
		2.	Questions for Slovakia had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil and China. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Slovakia can be found on the IAR web page for Slovakia.
		3.	Ms. Princova made an opening presentation, summarizing Slovakia’s progress in implementation of its emission reduction and removal commitments related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. She elaborated on the national circumstances of Slovakia, which is a small landlocked country and a member State of the EU. She explained that Slovakia’s target for the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol was overachieved, with emissions 41.7 per cent lower in 2012 than in 1990. This was achieved mainly through stricter legislation, by introducing best available technologies and by fuel-switching from coal and oil to natural gas. Altogether, this led to a decoupling of economic growth from the level of GHG emissions in the period 1990–2012, during which the emission intensity of Slovakia’s gross domestic product decreased by 68 per cent. This trend continued during the economic crisis in the late 2000s, with emission intensity decreasing by 36 per cent between 2005 and 2012. In 2012, energy remained the most significant sector in terms of GHG emissions, with a share of 69.6 per cent of Slovakia’s total emissions, and within that sector emissions from transport showed the largest increase.
		4.	Slovakia is committed to contributing to the target of the EU under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol of a 20 per cent reduction in emissions by 2020 compared with the 1990 levels. In accordance with the ESD, Slovakia has a target to limit the growth in its emissions from the non-ETS sectors to 13 per cent by 2020 compared with the 2005 level (+13 per cent). The PaMs in place to achieve that target focus on improvements in energy efficiency and the increase of the share of renewables. The PaMs include: the National Reform Programme and its Action Plan, with targeted sectoral policies, including climate and energy policies; the National Environmental Strategy; the Energy Security Strategy; taxation of energy products and electricity; the Action Plan for Energy Efficiency; the National Action Plan for Biomass Use; the National Renewable Energy Action Plan; the Concept of Energy Efficiency in Buildings; the Waste Act; and the implementation of several EU-wide measures. According to Slovakia’s GHG emission projections, total emissions, taking into account implemented and adopted PaMs, are expected to decrease by 12.1 per cent by 2020 compared with the 2005 level. Thus, Slovakia considers that it is on its way to achieving its 2020 target for emissions from the non-ETS sectors. In addition, Ms. Princova explained that the EU and its member States are committed to a binding target of a reduction in domestic GHG emissions of at least 40 per cent by 2030 compared with the 1990 level.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from China and the Republic of Korea. The questions were related to Slovakia’s renewable energy target, PaMs in place to reduce emissions from international aviation and shipping, and the target for the sectors covered by the EU ETS. In response, Slovakia provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Slovakia.
			
	
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Slovenia
		1.	The first MA of Slovenia took place on 5 June 2015. Slovenia was represented by Mr. Uros Vajgl from the Ministry of Agriculture and the Environment.
		2.	Questions for Slovenia had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil and China. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Slovenia can be found on the IAR web page for Slovenia.
		3.	Mr. Vajgl made an opening presentation, summarizing Slovenia’s progress in the implementation of emission reduction and removal commitments related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. He elaborated on the national circumstances of Slovenia, which is a small country and a member State of the EU. Slovenia already experienced warming of 1.7 °C between 1961 and 2011 and, according to climate scenarios, expects significant climate change impacts by 2050, including a further increase in temperature and an increased occurrence of extreme weather events like floods. Mr. Vajgl explained that Slovenia achieved its target for the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol, an emission reduction of 8 per cent compared with the 1986 (base year) level, owing partly to a decoupling of economic growth from the level of GHG emissions in the period 1990–2012, during which the emission intensity of Slovenia’s gross domestic product fell by 40 per cent. He further explained that the biggest emission reductions were achieved in industry and transport and that the economic crisis also contributed to those reductions.
		4.	Slovenia is committed to contributing to the target of the EU under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol of a reduction in emissions of 20 per cent by 2020 compared with the 1990 level. In accordance with the ESD, Slovenia has a target to limit the growth in its emissions from the non-ETS sectors to 5 per cent by 2020 compared with the 2005 level (+5 per cent). According to its GHG emission projections, emissions from the non-ETS sectors, including the effect of implemented and adopted PaMs, are expected to be close to the trajectory of Slovenia’s target under the ESD. Mr. Vajgl explained that one of the main challenges regarding future emission reductions is the transport sector, which contributes 30 per cent of Slovenia’s total emissions and is the sector where half of the emission reductions required for the non-ETS sectors needs to happen. Such challenges relate to Slovenia being a transit country with dispersed settlements and daily migration flows. Mr. Vajgl also explained that additional PaMs will be needed for Slovenia to meet its target under the ESD; to this end, in 2014 Slovenia adopted the Operational Programme for Reducing GHG Emissions until 2020 with a View to 2030. The programme covers the non-ETS sectors, sets indicative sectoral targets and includes a list of measures to be implemented. Mr. Vajgl emphasized that the programme includes a target trajectory that ‘overshoots’ the target for 2020, which is necessary because of uncertainties in the transport sector and the need to facilitate the achievement of the 2030 target.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Brazil, China and India. The questions related to PaMs encouraging the use of RES and any related support schemes, and specific PaMs to deal with emissions from transit in the transport sector. In response, Slovenia provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Slovenia.
	
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of Ukraine
		1.	The first MA of Ukraine took place on 5 June 2015. Ukraine was represented by Ms. Elena Balbekova, Deputy Director of the Climate Policy Department, Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources.
		2.	Questions for Ukraine had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Brazil, China, the EU and Sweden. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Ukraine can be found on the IAR web page for Ukraine.
		3.	Ms. Balbekova made an opening presentation, summarizing Ukraine’s progress towards the achievement of its emission limitation and reduction commitment related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets. Ms. Balbekova initially described the new institutional arrangements related to climate change in the country, including the national inventory system of Ukraine. She explained the GHG emission trends since 1990 and highlighted the importance of the energy sector’s contribution to the national emissions, which has driven the observed trend of reduction in these emissions.
		4.	Referring to Ukraine’s target under the Convention, Ms. Balbekova provided information on Ukraine’s emission limitation commitment for participating in the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol to an emission level 24 per cent below the 1990 level by 2020. She described the policy framework and cross-sectoral measures for climate change inscribed in Ukraine’s new strategy for sustainable development and the national action plan on the implementation of the association agreement with the European Union, highlighting measures in the energy, industry and forestry sectors, and provided information on the impacts of the key mitigation actions. Ms. Balbekova provided information on the key assumptions on GDP and fuel consumption used in the three GHG emission projection scenarios presented in Ukraine’s sixth national communication and first biennial report and the results of these scenarios in terms of GHG emissions by sector. Finally, Ms. Balbekova provided a summary of the questions received prior to the working group session and the answers provided.
		5.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Australia, Brazil, China and the Republic of Korea. These questions were on: the tax code policy with regard to reductions in land tax and income tax for renewable energy businesses and the renewable energy action plan and whether they were related or separate policies; the plans to assess the economic feasibility of potentially increasing the level of ambition vis-à-vis development needs; the reasons for the many changes in the removal trends in the LULUCF sector; the economic and ecological appropriateness of the development of renewable energy; the possible additional measures to address climate change issues; and the assessment of how much of the economic growth will be sacrificed in the “with measures” and “with additional measures” emission scenarios compared with the baseline scenario or the “without measures” scenario. In response, Ukraine provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for Ukraine.
		
	Summary report on multilateral assessment of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
		1.	The first MA of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland took place on 5 June 2015. The United Kingdom was represented by Mr. Ben Lyon, Department of Energy & Climate Change.
		2.	Questions for the United Kingdom had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session by Australia, Brazil, China, New Zealand, Saudi Arabia and the United States. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by the United Kingdom can be found on the IAR web page for the United Kingdom.
		3.	Mr. Lyon made an opening presentation, summarizing the United Kingdom’s progress in the implementation of its emission reduction and removal commitments related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets.
		4.	He presented the United Kingdom’s target under the Convention (20 per cent reduction in emissions by 2020 compared with the 1990 level) and targets for the first and second commitment periods of the Kyoto Protocol (12.5 per cent reduction in emissions by 2012 compared with the base year level and a contribution to the joint commitment of the member States of EU of a 20 per cent reduction in emissions by 2020 compared with the base year level, respectively), as well as the United Kingdom’s contribution to the binding (20 per cent reduction in emissions by 2020 compared with the 1990 level) and conditional (30 per cent reduction in emissions by 2020 compared with the 1990 level) EU targets. He also presented the United Kingdom’s binding emission reduction target of 80 per cent below the 1990 level by 2050, enshrined in the Climate Change Act (2008).
		5.	Mr. Lyon further presented information on the United Kingdom’s national circumstances (population, energy demand and production, and GDP), followed by information on progress made towards achieving the United Kingdom’s targets. More specifically, he reported on GHG emission trends as well as GHG emissions by sector and by gas for 2012. The presentation also detailed total and sectoral GHG emission projections for 2030, including all implemented and adopted policies and measures. Furthermore, total and sectoral GHG emissions avoided as a result of the implementation of PaMs were reported by year (2009–2030). Finally, brief information on domestic adaptation and on the United Kingdom’s International Climate Fund financing activities was presented.
		6.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from Australia, Brazil, China, Fiji, Japan, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia and the United States. The questions were on: the impact of GHG emission reduction efforts on GDP; GHG emission trends in the waste and transport sectors; PaMs related to future technological development, the production of renewable energy, the built environment, transportation and domestic and international shipping; and the comparability of the United Kingdom’s GHG emission reduction targets (domestic, EU, Kyoto Protocol and Convention) and the progress made so far in meeting them. Questions were also raised in relation to the United Kingdom’s assessment of the social and economic consequences of its response measures. In response, the United Kingdom provided further explanations. Details can be found in the webcast of this session on the IAR web page for the United Kingdom.
			
Annex II
	Guiding questions to monitor and evaluate progress made in the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans
		1.	Where are we in the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans (NAPs)?
		2.	How are stakeholders involved in the formulation and implementation of NAPs and what are the existing institutional arrangements?
		3.	What support is available for the process to formulate and implement NAPs?
		4.	What best practices have emerged and what lessons have been learned from the process to formulate and implement NAPs?
		5.	Monitoring and evaluation and reporting related to the process to formulate and implement NAPs
		6.	Overall assessment of effectiveness and the ‘way forward’ in order to make recommendations based on the monitoring and evaluation of progress in accordance with paragraph 37 of decision 5/CP.17.
		
