Subsidiary Body for Implementation
	|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBI/2016/20 |
	|  |  | Distr.: General 31 January 2017  Original: English |
	
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its forty-fifth session, held in Marrakech from 7 to 15 November 2016
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session
		(Agenda item 1)		1–2	5
			II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)		3–16	5
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		3–7	5
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		8–9	8
			C.	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international 
assessment and review process 		10–11	8
			D.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and 
analysis process		12–13	8
		E.	Other mandated events		14	9
		F.	Election of officers other than the Chair		15–16	9
		III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda item 3)		17–22	9
			A.	Status of submission and review of second biennial reports from Parties 
included in Annex I to the Convention		17	9
			B.	Compilation and synthesis of second biennial reports from Parties included 
in Annex I to the Convention		18	9
			C.	Revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications 
by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting 
guidelines on national communications”		19–20	10
			D.	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in 
Annex I to the Convention for the period 1990–2014		21	10
			E.	Compilation and accounting reports for Annex B Parties under the 
Kyoto Protocol		22	10
		IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda item 4)		23–37	11
			A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not
included in Annex I to the Convention		–	11
			B.	Work on the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications 
from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention		23–28	11
		C.	Provision of financial and technical support		29–36	13
			D.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of 
Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention		37	14
			V.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a 
public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 5)		38–42	14
			VI.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a 
public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 6)		43–46	15
		VII.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol
		(Agenda item 7)		47–51	15
		A.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism	47	15
			B.	Procedures, mechanisms and institutional arrangements for appeals 
against decisions of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism	48–50	16
				C.	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log 
under the Kyoto Protocol		51	16
		VIII.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
		(Agenda item 8)		52–67	16
		IX.	National adaptation plans
		(Agenda item 9)		68–70	18
			X.	Report of the Adaptation Committee
(Agenda item 10)		71–72	19
			XI.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for 
Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 11)		73–74	19
			XII.	Development and transfer of technologies
(Agenda item 12)		75–86	20
				A.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the 
Climate Technology Centre and Network		75	20
				B.	Scope and modalities for the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism 
in relation to supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement		76–79	20
		C.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer		80–86	21
			XIII.	Terms of reference for the review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance
(Agenda item 13)		87	21
		XIV.	Capacity-building in developing countries
		(Agenda item 14)		88–93	22
			A.	Third comprehensive review of the implementation of the 
framework for capacity-building under the Convention		88	22
			B.	Third comprehensive review of the implementation of the 
framework for capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol		89	22
		C.	Paris Committee on Capacity-building		90–93	22
		XV.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
		(Agenda item 15)		94–106	23
		A.	Improved forum and work programme		94–102	23
			B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement
of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures		103–105	24
		C.	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol		106	25
		D.	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10		106	25
		XVI.	Gender and climate change
		(Agenda item 16)		107	25
		XVII.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
		(Agenda item 17)		108–109	26
		A.	Budget performance for the biennium 2016–2017		108–109	26
		B.	Audit report and financial statements for 2015		108–109	26
		C.	Other financial matters		108–109	26
		XVIII.	Reports on activities related to the implementation of Article 6 of the Convention	
		(Agenda item 18)		110	26
		XIX.	Other matters
		(Agenda item 19)		111	26
		XX.	Closure of and report on the session
		(Agenda item 20)		112–117	27
			
		
Addendum – FCCC/SBI/2016/20/Add.1
	Summary reports on multilateral assessments at the forty-fifth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation
	I.	Opening of the session
		(Agenda item 1)
			1.	The forty-fifth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) was held in Bab Ighli, Marrakech, Morocco, from 7 to 15 November 2016.
			2.	The Chair of the SBI, Mr. Tomasz Chruszczow (Poland), opened the session on Monday, 7 November, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Mr. Zhihua Chen (China) as Vice-Chair of the SBI and Mr. Sidat Yaffa (Gambia) as Rapporteur.
	II.	Organizational matters
		(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
			(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
				3.	At its 1st meeting, on 7 November, the SBI considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBI/2016/9).
				4.	At the same meeting, the agenda was adopted as follows, with agenda sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance:
				1.	Opening of the session.
				2.	Organizational matters:
					(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
					(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
					(c)	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process;
					(d)	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process;
					(e)	Other mandated events;
					(f)	Election of officers other than the Chair.
				3.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention:
					(a)	Status of submission and review of second biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(b)	Compilation and synthesis of second biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(c)	Revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications”;
					(d)	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention for the period 1990–2014;
					(e)	Compilation and accounting reports for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol.
				4.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention:
					(a)	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (agenda sub-item held in abeyance);
					(b)	Work on the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(c)	Provision of financial and technical support;
					(d)	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention.
					5.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
					6.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
				7.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol:
					(a)	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism;
					(b)	Procedures, mechanisms and institutional arrangements for appeals against decisions of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism;
					(c)	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol.
				8.	Matters relating to the least developed countries.
				9.	National adaptation plans.
				10.	Report of the Adaptation Committee.
					11.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.
				12.	Development and transfer of technologies:
					(a)	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network;
					(b)	Scope and modalities for the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism in relation to supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement;
					(c)	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer.
				13.	Terms of reference for the review of the functions of the Standing Committee		on Finance.
				14.	Capacity-building in developing countries:
					(a)	Third comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building under the Convention;
					(b)	Third comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol;
					(c)	Paris Committee on Capacity-building.
				15.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
					(a)	Improved forum and work programme;
					(b)	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures;
					(c)	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol;
					(d)	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10.
				16.	Gender and climate change.
				17.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters:
					(a)	Budget performance for the biennium 2016–2017;
					(b)	Audit report and financial statements for 2015;
					(c)	Other financial matters.
				18.	Reports on activities related to the implementation of Article 6 of the 
		Convention.
				19.	Other matters.
				20.	Closure of and report on the session.
					5.	At the same meeting, the Chair reminded Parties of the issues the consideration of which had been referred to the SBI by the Conference of the Parties (COP) and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) at their opening meetings:
						(a)	COP agenda items 6 (Report of the Adaptation Committee), 7 (Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts), 8(a) (Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network), 11 (Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention), 12 (Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention), 13 (Capacity-building under the Convention), 14 (Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention), 15 (Gender and climate change), 17(a) (Audit report and financial statements for 2015) and 17(b) (Budget performance for the biennium 2016–2017);
						(b)	CMP agenda items 9(a) (National communications from Parties included in Annex I), 9(b) (Final compilation and accounting reports for the first commitment period for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol), 9(c) (Annual compilation and accounting report for the second commitment period for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol), 10 (Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol), 11(b) (Matters related to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol), 13(a) (Audit report and financial statements for 2015) and 13(b) (Budget performance for the biennium 2016–2017).
					6.	The Chair informed Parties that the consideration of these referred items was proposed to be given under SBI items to which they are substantively linked.
					7.	Also, at the same meeting, statements were made by representatives of 11 Parties on behalf of, respectively, the Group of 77 and China (G77 and China), the Umbrella Group, the European Union (EU) and its member States, the Environmental Integrity Group (EIG), the African Group, the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), the least developed countries (LDCs), the Central American Integration System (SICA), the Arab Group, the Like-minded Developing Countries and the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean (AILAC). Statements were also made by a representative of the World Meteorological Organization and by representatives of trade union non-governmental organizations (NGOs), women and gender NGOs, youth NGOs, business and industry NGOs, environmental NGOs, farmers NGOs and indigenous peoples organizations.,
		B.	Organization of the work of the session
			(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
				8.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, at which the Chair drew attention to the information note on the organization of the session posted on the SBI 45 web page, and on his proposal to convene the closing plenary meeting of the SBI in two parts: the first one on Friday, 11 November, after completion of work of all negotiating groups, and the second one on Monday. 14 November, after completion of the multilateral assessment (MA) working group session.
				9.	On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to proceed on this basis and in line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
		C.	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process 
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			10.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided by the Chair on the organization of the first MA working group session under the second round of the international assessment and review process, to be convened on 12 and 14 November.
			11.	A summary report on the MA of the 24 Parties assessed at this session is contained in the addendum to this report.
		D.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process
			(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
				12.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided by the Chair on the organization of the workshop of the facilitative sharing of views (FSV) under the international consultation and analysis (ICA) process, which was to take place on 10 November.
				13.	The Chair drew attention to the ICA modalities and guidelines as well as the FSV web pages. He informed the SBI that the output of the ICA process will include, for each of the seven Parties participating in this FSV workshop, a record of the proceedings of the FSV session and a summary report as the outcome of the technical analysis of the Party’s biennial update report.
		E.	Other mandated events
			(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
				14.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note that no other events were taking place at this session.
		F.	Election of officers other than the Chair
			(Agenda sub-item 2(e))
				15.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, as well as at the second part of its 2nd meeting. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled rule 27 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, whereby the SBI is expected to elect its Vice-Chair and Rapporteur. At the same meeting, the SBI noted that the consultations on the nominations were ongoing.
				16.	At the second part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI elected Mr. Zhihua Chen (China) as Vice-Chair, and Ms. Tugba Icmeli (Turkey) as Rapporteur.
	III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda item 3)
		A.	Status of submission and review of second biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(a))
			Proceedings
				17.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2016/INF.9.
		B.	Compilation and synthesis of second biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(b))
			Proceedings
				18.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting as well as at the first part of its 2nd meeting, and had before it document FCCC/SBI/2016/INF.10 and Add.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Helen Plume (New Zealand) and Ms. Anne Rasmussen (Samoa). At the first part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of this item at SBI 46 (May 2017).
		C.	Revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications”
(Agenda sub-item 3(c))
			Proceedings
				19.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 2nd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that the Chair consult with interested Parties on this matter and report back at the closing plenary.
				20.	At the second part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue its consideration of the outstanding issue contained in paragraph 71 of the draft “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications” at SBI 46. Statements were made by representatives of five Parties as well as by a representative speaking on behalf of the EU and its member States.
		D.	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention for the period 1990–2014
(Agenda sub-item 3(d))
			Proceedings
				21.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2016/19. At the second part of the 2nd meeting, one Party made a statement on this matter.
		E.	Compilation and accounting reports for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 3(e))
			Proceedings
				22.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and recommended that the CMP take note of the information contained in documents FCCC/KP/CMP/2016/6 and Add.1. As referred to by the CMP, the SBI also considered the final compilation and accounting reports for the first commitment period for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol, and recommended that the CMP take note of the information contained in those reports.
	IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda item 4)
		A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
			(Agenda sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance)
		B.	Work on the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
			(Agenda sub-item 4(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				23.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the first part of its 2nd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2016/15, FCCC/SBI/2016/16 and FCCC/SBI/2016/17. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Helen Plume (New Zealand) and Ms. Anne Rasmussen (Samoa). As referred to by the COP, the SBI also considered the issue of the review of the mandate and terms of reference of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (CGE), and agreed that it be discussed in the same informal consultations. At the first part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				24.	The SBI noted the progress reports of the CGE.
				25.	The SBI took note of the progress made by the CGE in continuing to implement its workplan for 2016, targeting all elements of its work programme, including:
					(a)	The training programme for the team of technical experts and updating the training materials for the preparation of national communications and biennial update reports (BURs);
					(b)	Conducting three regional training workshops on the preparation of BURs, during which 136 experts from 100 Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties) were trained. The SBI expressed its gratitude to the Governments of Togo, Sri Lanka and Saint Lucia for hosting the workshops;
					(c)	The implementation of the training programme referred to in decision 20/CP.19, paragraph 4, to enhance the capacity of experts nominated to the UNFCCC roster of experts to conduct efficient and effective technical analysis of BURs;
					(d)	Contributing resource persons to the three UNFCCC regional hands-on training workshops on the building of sustainable national greenhouse gas inventory management systems and the use of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. The SBI expressed its gratitude to the Governments of Lesotho, Panama and the Republic of Korea for hosting the workshops;
					(e)	Releasing the upgraded CGE e-learning courses based on the latest CGE training materials for the preparation of national communications by non-Annex I Parties, which are available on the secretariat’s Learning Management System. As at 15 October 2016, a total of 235 experts had registered for the courses;
					(f)	Organizing and presenting eight webinars, four on vulnerability and adaptation assessment and four on mitigation assessment, involving a total of 313 participants as at 26 October 2016;
					(g)	Releasing an interactive online platform, called the e-Network, that provides access to the training materials, aimed at facilitating the preparation of national communications, BURs and greenhouse gas inventories;
					(h)	The analytical paper prepared by the CGE containing its recommendations on elements to be considered in a future revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention”.
				26.	The SBI took note of the estimated budgetary implications required to support the implementation of the work of the CGE in 2017–2018. It also invited multilateral programmes and organizations to collaborate with the CGE, as appropriate, in the provision of support to non-Annex I Parties for preparing their national communications and BURs.
				27.	In accordance with decision 19/CP.19, paragraph 8, the SBI completed its review of the mandate and terms of reference of the CGE and recommended a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption at COP 22.
				28.	The SBI considered CGE membership and recommended draft conclusions on the matter for consideration and adoption at COP 22.
		C.	Provision of financial and technical support
			(Agenda sub-item 4(c))
			1.	Proceedings
				29.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the first part of its 2nd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2016/INF.17, FCCC/SBI/2016/INF.18 and FCCC/CP/2016/6. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited a representative of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) to make a statement. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Helen Plume (New Zealand) and Ms. Anne Rasmussen (Samoa). At the first part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				30.	The SBI welcomed the information provided by the GEF in its report to COP 22 on:
					(a)	The establishment of the Capacity-building Initiative for Transparency (CBIT), including its programming and implementation modalities, and the voluntary contributions pledged by several countries;
					(b)	The financial support provided for the preparation of national communications and BURs by non-Annex I Parties;
					(c)	The Global Support Programme for Preparation of National Communications and Biennial Update Reports by non-Annex I Parties, especially regarding the development and implementation of the 2016 work programme thereof.
				31.	The SBI recommended that the COP request the GEF to continue providing the information referred to in paragraph 30 above in its annual reports.
				32.	The SBI noted with appreciation the successful efforts of the GEF to take swift action in the establishment of the CBIT through voluntary contributions. The SBI welcomed the pledges made by several countries to make voluntary contributions to the CBIT. It also welcomed the signing of the first contribution agreement by a country and encouraged others that have pledged to make voluntary contributions to finalize their contribution agreements. The SBI noted that the CBIT efforts will be included in the next replenishment of the GEF.
				33.	The SBI encouraged the GEF, subject to the availability of financial resources in the CBIT Trust Fund, to approve the first set of CBIT projects as early as possible. It also encouraged developing countries to submit project proposals to access financial resources from the CBIT Trust Fund.
				34.	The SBI noted that, as at 9 November 2016, 147 initial, 127 second, 29 third and 2 fourth national communications and 1 fifth national communication from non-Annex I Parties had been submitted and that, by the end of 2016, 1 additional initial national communication, 9 additional second and 18 additional third national communications from non-Annex I Parties are expected to be submitted. It also noted that, as at 8 November 2016, 34 non-Annex I Parties had submitted their first BUR and a further 5 non-Annex I Parties are expected to submit their first BUR by 31 December 2016. Additionally, by the end of 2016, 6 non-Annex I Parties are expected to submit their second BUR.
				35.	While recognizing the challenges that non-Annex I Parties face in submitting their BURs in a timely manner, the SBI further noted that, as at 9 November 2016, there were many outstanding submissions of BURs from non-Annex I Parties. Recalling decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 41(a), which states that non-Annex I Parties, consistent with their capabilities and the level of support provided for reporting, should submit their first BUR by December 2014, the SBI encouraged non-Annex I Parties that have not yet completed and submitted their first BUR to do so as soon as possible.
				36.	The SBI noted the report by the secretariat on regional workshops held in 2016 on the building of national greenhouse gas inventory systems and the use of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Recalling the request of non-Annex I Parties for further technical support aimed at improving their domestic capacity to facilitate continuity in meeting their reporting requirements, the SBI encouraged Parties included in Annex II to the Convention and other developed country Parties in a position to do so to provide financial resources to enable the secretariat to continue responding to that request.
		D.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
			(Agenda sub-item 4(d))
			Proceedings
				37.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the summary reports made available so far on the UNFCCC website in the period from 1 March to 30 September 2016.
	V.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
		(Agenda item 5)
		1.	Proceedings
			38.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and at the first part of its 2nd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Madeleine Diouf Sarr (Senegal) and Ms. Gertraud Wollansky (Austria). At the first part of its 2nd meeting, it considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			39.	The SBI continued its deliberations in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 29, referring to Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
			40.	The SBI noted with appreciation the efforts made by the secretariat to maintain and further improve the interim registry for nationally determined contributions, as appropriate.
			41.	The SBI took note of the views exchanged by Parties at the session on the modalities and procedures for the operation and use of the public registry as referred to in decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 29, including on the linkages of its work under this agenda item to the work under SBI 45 agenda item 6, and to the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Paris Agreement (APA).
			42.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 46.
	VI.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
		(Agenda item 6)
		1.	Proceedings
			43.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and at the first part of its 2nd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Diouf Sarr and Ms. Wollansky and back-to-back with the consultations on agenda item 5. At the first part of its 2nd meeting, it considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			44.	The SBI continued its consideration of a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
			45.	The SBI took note of the views expressed by Parties during the session on this matter, including on the existing or potential linkages to SBI 45 agenda item 5, the continued work of the secretariat on the interim registry, the web page maintained by the secretariat on undertakings in adaptation planning and the work of the APA.
			46.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 46.
	VII.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol
		(Agenda item 7)
		A.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism
			(Agenda sub-item 7(a))
			Proceedings
				47.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the first part of its 2nd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2016/INF.16. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Karoliina Anttonen (Finland) and Ms. Hlobsile Sikhosana-Shongwe (Swaziland). At the first part of the 2nd meeting, the Chair reported that the consultations did not result in any conclusions. In accordance with rules 10(c) and 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, this matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBI 46.
		B.	Procedures, mechanisms and institutional arrangements for appeals against decisions of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism
			(Agenda sub-item 7(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				48.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the first part of its 2nd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations facilitated by Ms. Anttonen. At the first part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusion below.
			2.	Conclusion
				49.	In accordance with the mandate set out in decision 3/CMP.6, paragraph 18, the SBI continued to discuss the issue of procedures, mechanisms and institutional arrangements for appeals against the decisions of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism.
				50.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 50 (June 2019) on the basis of, inter alia, the draft text contained in document FCCC/SBI/2012/33/Add.1.
		C.	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol
			(Agenda sub-item 7(c))
			Proceedings
				51.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2016/INF.20.
	VIII.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
		(Agenda item 8)
		1.	Proceedings
			52.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and at the first part of its 2nd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2016/18. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Mr. Abias Huongo (Angola), Chair of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG), to report on the group’s activities. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Jens Fugl (Denmark) and Mr. Mamadou Honadia (Burkina Faso). At the first part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			53.	The SBI welcomed the report on the 30th meeting of the LEG, held in Monrovia from 7 to 10 September 2016, and expressed its gratitude to the Government of Liberia for hosting the meeting.
			54.	The SBI also expressed its gratitude to the Governments of Canada and Ireland for financially supporting the work of the LEG.
			55.	The SBI welcomed the progress made by the LEG in supporting the LDCs in the continued implementation of its two-year rolling work programme for 2016–2017.
			56.	The SBI also welcomed the successful conduct of the NAP Expo that took place from 11 to 15 July 2016 in Bonn, Germany, and the valuable role that the expo played in providing an opportunity for countries to exchange experience and foster partnerships with a wide range of actors and stakeholders, including non-Party stakeholders, in order to advance national adaptation plans (NAPs).
			57.	The SBI further welcomed the efforts of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and the GEF secretariats, as well as other organizations, regional centres and networks in organizing special sessions related to the process to formulate and implement NAPs during the NAP Expo.
			58.	The SBI noted with appreciation the progress of the LEG and the Adaptation Committee in addressing their joint mandates contained in decision 1/CP.21 related to the implementation of the Paris Agreement.
			59.	The SBI welcomed the decision of the Board of the GCF on expediting support for developing countries for the formulation of NAPs, consistent with decisions 1/CP.16, 5/CP.17 and 1/CP.21, paragraph 46, and looks forward to how the GCF will support the subsequent implementation of the policies, projects and programmes of developing country Parties as requested in decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 46.
			60.	The SBI noted the progress of the provision of financial support for the formulation of NAPs through the GCF. It requested the LEG, in collaboration with the GCF secretariat and relevant partner organizations, to continue considering ways to further enhance the provision of support to the LDCs for accessing funding from the GCF for the process to formulate and implement NAPs and to include information thereon in its report for consideration at SBI 46.
			61.	The SBI noted the gaps and needs in relation to the LDC Parties advancing their work on the formulation and implementation of NAPs and emerging needs arising from the Paris Agreement, as identified in the report on the 30th meeting of the LEG, and requested the LEG to explore how those gaps and needs can be addressed through the planned regional training workshops on NAPs.
			62.	The SBI requested the LEG to continue providing technical support to the LDC Parties for accessing funding for the formulation of NAPs and for the subsequent implementation of the policies, project and programmes identified in the NAPs under the GCF, and to facilitate the provision of scientific support to the LDC Parties, in collaboration with relevant United Nations agencies and GCF implementing partners.
			63.	The SBI noted that, as at 10 November 2016, 13 project proposals for the implementation of national adaptation programmes of action (NAPAs) and for the process to formulate and implement NAPs that were previously technically cleared by the GEF, amounting to USD 87 million, had been approved by the GEF Council and were ready for implementation. An additional 35 technically cleared projects, seeking USD 231.4 million from the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF), have yet to be funded.
			64.	The SBI welcomed the follow-up project under the LDCF of the NAP Global Support Programme for LDCs through which all LDCs that were not supported under the first project will have the opportunity to access one-to-one support for their process to formulate and implement NAPs tailored to their specific needs and circumstances.
			65.	The SBI noted with appreciation the new pledges to the LDCF of EUR 24 million for the years 2016–2018 which were made during the LDCF/Special Climate Change Fund Council meeting in October 2016.
			66.	The SBI urged additional contributions to the LDCF and other funds under the Financial Mechanism, as appropriate, recognizing the importance of the full implementation of NAPAs and successfully undertaking the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
			67.	The SBI noted with appreciation the continued active engagement and collaboration of the LEG with the Adaptation Committee, the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change and other constituted bodies under the Convention, as well as the continued active engagement with a wide range of relevant organizations, agencies and regional centres and networks, and welcomed the efforts of the group to provide coherent and integrated support to countries in relation to their NAPs.
	IX.	National adaptation plans
		(Agenda item 9)
		1.	Proceedings
			68.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and at the first part of its 2nd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2016/18, FCCC/SB/2016/2 and FCCC/SBI/2016/INF.11. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Fugl and Mr. Honadia. At the first part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			69.	The SBI welcomed the information paper on progress in the process to formulate and implement NAPs and took note of the other relevant documents prepared for the session.
			70.	The SBI recommended a draft decision on NAPs for consideration and adoption at COP 22.
	X.	Report of the Adaptation Committee
(Agenda item 10)
		Proceedings
			71.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and at the first part of its 2nd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2016/2. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Ms. Minpeng Chen (China), Co-Chair of the Adaptation Committee, to report on the committee’s activities. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item together with agenda item 4 of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Julio Cordano (Chile) and Mr. Gottfried von Gemmingen (Germany).
			72.	As referred to by the COP, the SBI also considered the issue of the review of the progress and performance of the Adaptation Committee, and agreed that it would be discussed at the same informal consultations. At the first part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on these matters for consideration and adoption at COP 22.
	XI.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 11)
		Proceedings
			73.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and at the second and resumed second parts of its 2nd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2016/3. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Ms. Shereen D’Souza (United States of America), Co-Chair of the Executive Committee, to report on the activities of the Executive Committee. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item together with agenda item 5 of the SBSTA in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Beth Lavender (Canada) and Mr. Alf Wills (South Africa).
			74.	As referred to by the COP, the SBI also considered the issue of the review of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts, and agreed that it would be discussed at the same informal consultations. At the second part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on the Warsaw International Mechanism for consideration and adoption at COP 22. At the resumed second part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on the review of the Warsaw International Mechanism for consideration and adoption at COP 22.
	XII.	Development and transfer of technologies
(Agenda item 12)
		A.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network
(Agenda sub-item 12(a))
			Proceedings
				75.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 2nd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2016/1. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with agenda sub-item 6(a) of the SBSTA in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Elfriede-Anna More (Austria) and Mr. Washington Zhakata (Zimbabwe). At the second part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 22.
		B.	Scope and modalities for the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism in relation to supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 12(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				76.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the first part of its 2nd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. More and Mr. Zhakata. At the first part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				77.	The SBI recalled that SBI 44 initiated the elaboration of the scope and modalities for the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism referred to in decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 69 (hereinafter referred to as the periodic assessment).
				78.	The SBI also recalled its invitation to Parties and observers to submit their views on the scope and modalities for the periodic assessment by 25 January 2017 for consideration at SBI 46.
				79.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 46.
		C.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer
			(Agenda sub-item 12(c))
			1.	Proceedings
				80.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the first part of its 2nd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/CP/2016/6. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. More and Mr. Zhakata. At the first part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				81.	The SBI welcomed the report of the GEF on the progress made in carrying out the Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer (PSP), including the actions taken by the GEF in response to the recommendations of the Technology Executive Committee (TEC).
				82.	The SBI welcomed the new structure of the report referred to in paragraph 81 above. It encouraged the GEF to continue elaborating on the challenges and lessons learned in carrying out the PSP as part of its future progress reports.
				83.	The SBI welcomed the approval by the GEF Council of 31 projects with technology transfer objectives for climate change mitigation and 10 projects for climate adaptation during the GEF reporting period. It further welcomed the progress of the PSP technology transfer pilot projects.
				84.	The SBI welcomed the ongoing collaboration between the Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN) and the regional technology transfer and finance centres supported by the GEF under the PSP, including the collaboration on responses to developing country requests for technical assistance. It encouraged the GEF and the CTCN to continue enhancing their collaboration. It further encouraged Parties to enhance collaboration between their GEF focal points and their national designated entities for technology development and transfer.
				85.	The SBI noted the importance of implementing the technology needs assessment (TNA) results and encouraged Parties to consider ways to use their System for Transparent Allocation of Resources allocation for piloting the implementation of the TNA results.
				86.	The SBI looks forward to the updated report of the TEC on the evaluation of the PSP, in accordance with document FCCC/SBI/2015/22, paragraph 79.
	XIII.	Terms of reference for the review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance
(Agenda item 13)
		Proceedings
			87.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 2nd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/CP/2016/MISC.1 and Add.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Delphine Eyraud (France) and Ms. Ngedikes Olai Uludong (Palau). At the second part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 22 on the terms of reference for the review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance (SCF) referred to in decision 6/CP.20, paragraph 23.
	XIV.	Capacity-building in developing countries
		(Agenda item 14)
		A.	Third comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building under the Convention
			(Agenda sub-item 14(a))
			Proceedings
				88.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 2nd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2016/14. At the 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Crispin d’Auvergne (Saint Lucia) and Mr. Paul Watkinson (France). At the second part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 22.
		B.	Third comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol
			(Agenda sub-item 14(b))
			Proceedings
				89.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 2nd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2016/14. At the 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. d’Auvergne and Mr. Watkinson. At the second part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at CMP 12.
		C.	Paris Committee on Capacity-building
			(Agenda sub-item 14(c))
			1.	Proceedings
				90.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the first part of its 2nd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. d’Auvergne and Mr. Watkinson. At the first part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				91.	The SBI agreed that in 2017 the first focus area or theme for the Paris Committee on Capacity-building will be on capacity-building activities for the implementation of nationally determined contributions in the context of the Paris Agreement.
				92.	The SBI also agreed that representatives of the following operating entities of the Financial Mechanism and the constituted bodies established under the Convention will be invited to participate in the first meeting of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, which will be held in conjunction with SBI 46 and SBSTA 46 (May 2017):
					(a)	The GEF;
					(b)	The GCF;
					(c)	The Adaptation Committee;
					(d)	The LEG;
					(e)	The SCF;
					(f)	The TEC.
				93.	The SBI further agreed that representatives of other bodies established under the Convention and the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism are invited to identify representatives to collaborate, as appropriate, on specific activities related to the work of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, and particularly encourages a representative of the CTCN to participate in the first meeting of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building.
	XV.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
		(Agenda item 15)
		A.	Improved forum and work programme
			(Agenda sub-item 15(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				94.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 2nd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SB/2016/INF.2 and FCCC/TP/2016/7. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with SBSTA agenda sub-item 9(a) and to convene the improved forum in accordance with the procedure applicable to a contact group co-chaired by the Chair of the SBI and the Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize), assisted by Ms. Natalya Kushko (Ukraine) and Mr. Andrei Marcu (Panama). The SBI also agreed to consider this agenda sub-item back-to-back with SBI agenda sub-item 15(b) and SBSTA agenda sub-item 9(b). At the second part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				95.	The SBI and the SBSTA convened the 2nd meeting of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and recalled the work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				96.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the report of the workshop on views and experiences on economic diversification and transformation and on just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs, held in Doha on 2–4 October 2016, and expressed their gratitude to the Government of Qatar for hosting this workshop.
				97.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the views expressed by Parties and observer organizations, contained in their submissions, on economic diversification and transformation and on just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs, taking into account paragraphs 1 and 6 of decision 11/CP.21, in the context of sustainable development, in order to implement the work of the improved forum.
				98.	The SBI and the SBSTA held an in-forum discussion on the workshop referred to in paragraph 96 above and agreed to advance the technical work on the impact of the implementation of response measures by constituting an ad hoc technical expert group to meet in-session during SBI 46 and SBSTA 46. They also agreed that the ad hoc technical expert group should elaborate on the technical work on the areas of the work programme in the context of sustainable development.
				99.	The SBI and the SBSTA further agreed that the ad hoc technical expert group will spend two days – one day on each – on considering the two areas of the work programme.
				100.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested Parties to forward to the secretariat their nominations of experts in accordance with the terms of reference through the coordinators of the regional groups by 28 February 2017. Experts should have relevant qualifications and expertise, and at least five years of professional experience on the issues referred to in paragraph 98 above. The SBI and the SBSTA also requested the secretariat to publish the list of all experts nominated on the UNFCCC website by 15 March 2017.
				101.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested their Chairs to invite relevant intergovernmental and international organizations, including the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Development Programme, the International Labour Organization, the International Trade Union Confederation or others, to nominate two experts each.
				102.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed that the ad hoc technical expert group will nominate its co-chairs at the opening contact group of the 3rd meeting of the improved forum at SBI 46 and SBSTA 46.
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures
			(Agenda sub-item 15(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				103.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 2nd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with SBSTA agenda sub-item 9(b) and back-to-back with SBI agenda sub-item 15(a) and SBSTA agenda sub-item 9(a). At the second part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below. At the same meeting, the SBI Chair informed Parties that he would request the co-facilitators of the informal consultations to assist him and the SBSTA Chair in preparing the reflections note referred to in paragraph 105 below.
			2.	Conclusions
				104.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the submissions from Parties and observer organizations and welcomed the views expressed therein on this agenda sub-item.
				105.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the Chairs of the SBI and the SBSTA, with the support of the secretariat, to prepare by 31 March 2017 a reflections note on the views expressed by Parties, both in the submissions referred to in paragraph 104 above and in the aforementioned discussions, relating to the modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures referred to in paragraph 34 of decision 1/CP.21, with a view to facilitating Parties’ further discussions thereon at SBI 46 and SBSTA 46.
		C.	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol
			(Agenda sub-item 15(c))
		D.	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10
			(Agenda sub-item 15(d))
			Proceedings
				106.	The SBI considered these agenda sub-items at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 2nd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to the Chair’s proposal that substantive discussions under these sub-items will be held in the response measures forum jointly with those under sub-item 15(a). At the second part of its 2nd meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that no specific conclusions had been reached on these matters. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of these matters at SBI 46.
	XVI.	Gender and climate change
		(Agenda item 16)
		Proceedings
			107.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 2nd meeting, and had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2016/10 and FCCC/SBI/2016/MISC.2. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Martin Hession (EU) and Ms. Winfred Lichuma (Kenya). At the second part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 22.
	XVII.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
		(Agenda item 17)
		A.	Budget performance for the biennium 2016–2017
(Agenda item 17(a))
		B.	Audit report and financial statements for 2015
(Agenda item 17(b))
		C.	Other financial matters
(Agenda item 17(c))
			Proceedings
				108.	The SBI considered these agenda sub-items at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 2nd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2016/13, FCCC/SBI/2016/INF.12 and Add.1, FCCC/SBI/2016/INF.13, FCCC/SBI/2016/INF.14, FCCC/SBI/2016/INF.15 and FCCC/SBI/2016/INF.19. At its 1st meeting, the Chair invited the Executive Secretary, 
Ms. Patricia Espinosa, to address the SBI. At the same meeting, the SBI took note of information contained in documents prepared for the session and agreed to consider these agenda sub-items in a contact group chaired by Mr. Kunihito Shimada (Japan).
				109.	At the second part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on financial and budgetary matters for consideration and adoption at COP 22 and a draft decision on financial and budgetary matters for consideration and adoption at CMP 12.
	XVIII.	Reports on activities related to the implementation of 
Article 6 of the Convention
		(Agenda item 18)
		Proceedings
			110.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in documents FCCC/SBI/2016/11 and FCCC/SBI/2016/12.
	XIX.	Other matters
		(Agenda item 19)
		Proceedings
			111.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. The representative of one Party made a statement.
	XX.	Closure of and report on the session
		(Agenda item 20)
		1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
			112.	At the second part of the 2nd meeting, a representative of the secretariat provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during the session in accordance with the provisions of rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
			113.	She informed the SBI that there were a number of activities coming out of negotiations at the session that call for more support by the secretariat and, therefore, require additional resources over and above the approved core budget for the biennium 2016–2017. These comprise:
				(a)	Under agenda item 16, “Gender and climate change”, funding in the amount of EUR 320,000 will be required to support, facilitate and engage in implementing gender-related activities;
				(b)	Under agenda item 17(c), “Other financial matters”, additional requirements for activities that will be undertaken in the current biennium to enhance the transparency and efficiency of the budget process will be absorbed by the secretariat within available resources.
			114.	She also stated that the amount of EUR 320,000 was preliminary and was based on the available information at that time. She hoped that she can count on the continued generosity of Parties to provide additional funding for activities under agenda item 16 in a timely and predictable manner, because without supplementary contributions the secretariat will not be in a position to provide the requested support.
			115.	She further informed the SBI that some of the conclusions adopted at this session will have budgetary implications beyond 2017. The resource requirements for 2018–2019 will be reviewed in the context of established budgetary procedures.
		2.	Closure of and report on the session
			116.	At its resumed second part of its 2nd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session and to make it available to all Parties.
			117.	Closing statements were made by representatives of 12 Parties, including on behalf of the G77 and China, the Umbrella Group, the EU and its member States, the EIG, the African Group, AOSIS, the LDCs, SICA, AILAC and the Coalition of Rainforest Nations. Statements were also made by representatives of trade union NGOs, women and gender NGOs, youth NGOs, environmental NGOs, farmers NGOs and indigenous peoples organizations. The Chair thanked Parties for their support and closed the session.,
			
