|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBI/2017/19 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 31 January 2018  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Implementation
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its forty-seventh session, held in Bonn from 
6 to 15 November 2017
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session
(Agenda item 1)		1–2	4
		II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)		3–15	4
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		3–6	4
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		7–9	6
			C.	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international 
assessment and review process		10	7
			D.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation
and analysis process 		11–12	7
		E.	Other mandated events		13	7
		F.	Election of officers other than the Chair		14–15	7
			III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 3)		16–18	8
				A.	Status of submission and review of second biennial reports from Parties 
included in Annex I to the Convention		16	8
				B.	Compilation and synthesis of second biennial reports from Parties 
included in Annex I to the Convention		17	8
					C.	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties
included in Annex I to the Convention for the period 1990–2015 		18	8
			IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 4)		19–29	9
				A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties 
not included in Annex I to the Convention			9
				B.	Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications
from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention		19–26	9
		C.	Provision of financial and technical support		27	11
			D.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports
of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention		28–29	11
			V.	Common time frames for nationally determined contributions referred to
in Article 4, paragraph 10, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 5)		30–34	11
			VI.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of
a public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 6)		35–38	12
			VII.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of
a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 7)		39–42	13
			VIII.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda item 8)		43–44	13
				A.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the 
clean development mechanism		43	13
				B.	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log
under the Kyoto Protocol		44	13
			IX.	Coordination of support for the implementation of activities in relation to
mitigation actions in the forest sector by developing countries,
including institutional arrangements
(Agenda item 9)		45	13
			X.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
(Agenda item 10)		46–60	14
			XI.	National adaptation plans
(Agenda item 11)		61–74	15
			XII.	Report of the Adaptation Committee
(Agenda item 12)		75–80	17
			XIII.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism
for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 13)		81–83	17
			XIV.	Development and transfer of technologies
(Agenda item 14)		84–92	18
				A.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee
and the Climate Technology Centre and Network 		84	18
		B.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer 		85–92	18
			XV.	Matters relating to climate finance
(Agenda item 15)		93–94	19
		A.	Review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance 		93	19
		B.	Third review of the Adaptation Fund 		94	20
			XVI.	Matters relating to capacity-building
(Agenda item 16)		95–114	20
		A.	Capacity-building under the Convention		95–104	20
			B.	Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee
on Capacity-building 		105	21
		C.	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol		106–114	21
			XVII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
(Agenda item 17)		115–131	22
		A.	Improved forum and work programme 		115–125	22
			B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement
of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures		126–130	24
		C.	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol			25
		D.	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10		131	25
			XVIII.	Ways of enhancing the implementation of education, training, public awareness,
public participation and public access to information so as to enhance actions
under the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 18)		132–140	25
			XIX.	Report on activities related to Action for Climate Empowerment
(Agenda item 19)		141	26
			XX.	Gender and climate change 
(Agenda item 20)		142	26
			XXI.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
(Agenda item 21)		143–150	26
		A.	Budget performance for the biennium 2016–2017 			26
		B.	Audit report and financial statements for 2016 			26
		C.	Programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019			26
		D.	Other budgetary and financial matters		143–150	26
			XXII.	Other matters
(Agenda item 22)		151	27
			XXIII.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 23)		152–157	27
		Annex
			Summary report on the multilateral assessment of Belarus at the forty-seventh 
session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation		29
	I.	Opening of the session
		(Agenda item 1)
			1.	The forty-seventh session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) was held at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Bonn, Germany, from 6 to 15 November 2017.
			2.	The Chair of the SBI, Mr. Tomasz Chruszczow (Poland), opened the session on Monday, 6 November, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Mr. Zhihua Chen (China) as Vice-Chair of the SBI and Ms. Tugba Icmeli (Turkey) as Rapporteur.
	II.	Organizational matters
		(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
			(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
				3.	At its 1st meeting, on 6 November, the SBI considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations and the supplementary provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBI/2017/8 and Add.1).
				4.	On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to amend the title of item 18 of the supplementary provisional agenda to include “education” on the basis of the understanding that paragraph 83 of decision 1/CP.21 should be read together with paragraph 82 of decision 1/CP.21 and in the light of Article 12 of the Paris Agreement.
				5.	Subsequently, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBI adopted the supplementary agenda as orally amended, with sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance:
				1.	Opening of the session.
				2.	Organizational matters:
					(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
					(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
					(c)	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process;
					(d)	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process;
					(e)	Other mandated events;
					(f)	Election of officers other than the Chair.
				3.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention:
					(a)	Status of submission and review of second biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(b)	Compilation and synthesis of second biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(c)	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention for the period 1990–2015.
				4.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention:
					(a)	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (agenda sub-item held in abeyance);
					(b)	Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(c)	Provision of financial and technical support;
					(d)	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention.
					5.	Common time frames for nationally determined contributions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 10, of the Paris Agreement.
					6.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
					7.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
					8.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol:
						(a)	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism;
						(b)	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol.
					9.	Coordination of support for the implementation of activities in relation to mitigation actions in the forest sector by developing countries, including institutional arrangements.
					10.	Matters relating to the least developed countries.
					11.	National adaptation plans.
					12.	Report of the Adaptation Committee.
					13.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.
					14.	Development and transfer of technologies:
						(a)	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network;
						(b)	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer.
					15.	Matters relating to climate finance:
						(a)	Review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance;
						(b)	Third review of the Adaptation Fund.
					16.	Matters relating to capacity-building:
						(a)	Capacity-building under the Convention;
						(b)	Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building;
						(c)	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol.
					17.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
						(a)	Improved forum and work programme;
						(b)	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures;
						(c)	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol;
						(d)	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10.
					18.	Ways of enhancing the implementation of education, training, public awareness, public participation and public access to information so as to enhance actions under the Paris Agreement.
					19.	Report on activities related to Action for Climate Empowerment.
					20.	Gender and climate change.
					21.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters:
						(a)	Budget performance for the biennium 2016–2017;
						(b)	Audit report and financial statements for 2016;
						(c)	Programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019;
						(d)	Other budgetary and financial matters.
					22.	Other matters.
					23.	Closure of and report on the session.
				6.	In addition, the Chair reminded Parties of the issues referred to the SBI by the Conference of the Parties (COP) and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) at their 1st meetings, which were to be considered by the SBI under its relevant existing agenda items.
		B.	Organization of the work of the session
			(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			7.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, at which the Chair drew attention to the deadline for all groups to conclude their work by 6 p.m. on Monday, 13 November, to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary, which was to be convened in two parts. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to proceed on that basis and in line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
			8.	At its 2nd meeting, on 6 November, which was held jointly with the 2nd meeting of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA), the SBI heard statements from Parties and observers. Statements were made by representatives of 16 Parties, including on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, the Umbrella Group, the European Union, the Environmental Integrity Group, the African Group, the Alliance of Small Island States, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty, the Coalition for Rainforest Nations, the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean, the least developed countries (LDCs) and the Like-minded Developing Countries (LMDCs).
			9.	Statements were also made by representatives of women and gender non-governmental organizations (NGOs), youth NGOs, business and industry NGOs, environmental NGOs, farmers NGOs, indigenous peoples organizations, local government and municipal authorities, research and independent NGOs and trade union NGOs.
		C.	Multilateral assessment working group session under the international assessment and review process
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			10.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided by the Chair on the organization of the second multilateral assessment working group session in the second round of the international assessment and review process, which was to be convened on Friday, 10 November. A summary report on the multilateral assessment of the Party assessed at the session is contained in the annex.
		D.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process
			(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
			11.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided by the Chair on the organization of the workshop for the facilitative sharing of views (FSV) under the international consultation and analysis (ICA) process, which was to take place on 10 November.
			12.	The Chair drew attention to the ICA modalities and guidelines as well as the FSV web pages. He informed the SBI that the output of the ICA process will include, for each of the five Parties participating in the FSV workshop, a record of the proceedings of the FSV session and a summary report as the outcome of the technical analysis of the Party’s biennial update report (BUR).
		E.	Other mandated events
			(Agenda sub-item 2(e))
			13.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided on the other mandated events being organized in conjunction with the session, highlighting the technical workshop organized by the secretariat with the aim of discussing possible ways to increase the efficiency and transparency of the budget process.
		F.	Election of officers other than the Chair
			(Agenda sub-item 2(f))
			14.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at its 5th meeting, on 15 November. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled rule 27 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, whereby the SBI was expected to elect its Vice-Chair and Rapporteur. At the same meeting, the SBI noted that the consultations on the nominations were ongoing.
			15.	At its 5th meeting, the SBI elected Mr. Naser Moghaddasi (Islamic Republic of Iran) as Vice-Chair of the SBI and Ms. Icmeli as Rapporteur.
	III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda item 3)
		A.	Status of submission and review of second biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(a))
			16.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.1. The Chair informed the SBI that since SBI 46, when that document was first presented and taken note of, there had been no additional submissions or reviews. He reminded Parties of the upcoming deadline (1 January 2018) for the submission of third biennial reports and seventh national communications (NCs) and encouraged them to make their submissions on time.
		B.	Compilation and synthesis of second biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(b))
			17.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Helen Plume (New Zealand) and Ms. Anne Rasmussen (Samoa). At the 3rd meeting, the Chair reported that the consultations had not resulted in any conclusions. In accordance with rules 10(c) and 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, this matter will be included on the provisional agenda for SBI 48 (April–May 2018).
		C.	Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention for the period 1990–2015
(Agenda sub-item 3(c))
			18.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2017/18. Representatives of four Parties made statements.
	IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
		(Agenda item 4)
		A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
			(Agenda sub-item 4(a) held in abeyance)
		B.	Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
			(Agenda sub-item 4(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				19.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2017/12, FCCC/SBI/2017/15, FCCC/SBI/2017/16 and FCCC/SBI/2017/17. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Plume and Ms. Rasmussen. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				20.	The SBI noted the progress report and technical reports of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (CGE) related to the implementation of its workplan for 2017.
				21.	The SBI welcomed the continued progress made by the CGE in implementing its workplan for 2017, including:
					(a)	Two regional hands-on training workshops on the preparation of mitigation actions and reporting on them in NCs and BURs, during which 80 experts from 60 Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties) were trained. The SBI expressed its gratitude to the Governments of Cambodia and South Africa and to the United Nations Environment Programme Regional Office for Africa in Pretoria, South Africa, for hosting the workshops. The workshops were organized in collaboration with the Global Support Programme for Preparation of National Communications and Biennial Update Reports by non-Annex I Parties. The SBI noted with appreciation the contributions of the Global Support Programme in organizing the workshops successfully;
					(b)	Updated training materials on:
						(i)	The preparation and reporting of mitigation actions and their effects in BURs;
						(ii)	The preparation of national greenhouse gas inventories;
						(iii)	The preparation of BURs: finance, technology and capacity-building needs and support received;
					(c)	A “Technical Tool To Facilitate Parties Prepare For And Participate In The International Consultation And Analysis”;
					(d)	Seven webinars, in which 287 participants took part: four seminars on vulnerability and adaptation assessment, two on mitigation actions and one on national greenhouse gas inventories. The SBI, noting the potential of the seminar format to reach a broad audience of practitioners, encouraged the CGE to continue this activity;
					(e)	The training programme referred to in decision 20/CP.19, paragraph 4, for enhancing the capacity of experts nominated to the UNFCCC roster of experts to conduct efficient and effective technical analyses of BURs. The SBI noted that an additional 55 experts successfully completed the training programme in 2017 and are eligible to become members of the teams of technical experts that undertake the technical analysis of BURs. The SBI encouraged those experts on the UNFCCC roster of experts who have not undergone the training to do so;
					(f)	The continued operation of the CGE e-learning courses on the preparation of NCs from non-Annex I Parties, which are available through the secretariat’s Learning Management System. A total of 126 experts had registered for the courses as at 6 November 2017. The SBI encouraged the CGE to continue to update its online training courses;
					(g)	The update of the CGE e-Network online platform, which allows users to access information on the preparation of NCs and BURs, search a database of available experts for assistance and interact with the CGE and other users of the network virtually.
				22.	The SBI noted the problems and constraints, lessons learned and best practices identified in the progress report and technical reports referred to in paragraph 20 above. The SBI encouraged the CGE, as per its mandate, to take them into consideration in the provision of technical assistance to non-Annex I Parties and to facilitate cooperation with interested potential partners, as appropriate.
				23.	The SBI noted the CGE work programme for 2018, including the following focus areas:
					(a)	Enhancing, in the light of the constraints on financial support, collaboration with interested potential partners to implement key activities planned;
					(b)	Creating formal regional networks of experts and practitioners involved in the process and preparation of NCs and BURs to serve as vehicles for the dissemination of information from the CGE to stakeholders;
					(c)	Strengthening communications and outreach so that stakeholders can gain a better understanding of the training products and opportunities available through the CGE for the preparation of NCs and BURs;
					(d)	Playing a catalytic role in promoting and attracting collaboration with interested potential partners to provide strategic guidance and direction in responding to the needs of non-Annex I Parties with regard to the preparation of NCs and BURs.
				24.	The SBI noted with concern that the planned regional hands-on training workshop for the Latin American and Caribbean region on the preparation of mitigation actions and reporting on them in NCs and BURs could not be conducted in 2017 owing to insufficient financial resources.
				25.	The SBI recalled the provisions and procedures for providing funding to the budget of the secretariat under the Convention and relevant COP decisions and took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities planned to be undertaken by the CGE, with the assistance of the secretariat, in order to implement its work programme for 2018. The SBI invited multilateral entities to collaborate with the CGE, as appropriate, in the provision of technical support to non-Annex I Parties for preparing their NCs and BURs.
				26.	The SBI requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		C.	Provision of financial and technical support
			(Agenda sub-item 4(c))
			27.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.9, FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.10 and FCCC/CP/2017/7 and
Add.1 and 2. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited a representative of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) to make a statement. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Plume and Ms. Rasmussen. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 48.
		D.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
			(Agenda sub-item 4(d))
			28.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the summary reports made available on the UNFCCC website by 8 September 2017.
			29.	At the same meeting, the Chair recalled that the COP had referred to the SBI the consideration of the revision of the ICA modalities and guidelines on the basis of experience in the first round of ICA. Noting that the first round of ICA was ongoing, the Chair suggested that it might be too early for the SBI to initiate its consideration of the matter. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to include an item on the revision of the ICA modalities and guidelines on the provisional agenda for SBI 48 with a view to reporting thereon to COP 24 (December 2018).
	V.	Common time frames for nationally determined contributions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 10, of the Paris Agreement
		(Agenda item 5)
		1.	Proceedings
			30.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. Statements were made by representatives of three Parties, including on behalf of the LMDCs. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Marianne Karlsen (Norway) and Mr. George Wamukoya (Kenya). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			31.	The SBI initiated its consideration of this matter.
			32.	The SBI took note of the request for it to report back thereon to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) at its first session.
			33.	The SBI invited Parties and observers to submit, by 31 March 2018, their views on common time frames for nationally determined contributions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 10, of the Paris Agreement, including on, but not limited to, the usefulness of and options for common time frames and the advantages and disadvantages of those options, for consideration at SBI 48.
			34.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 48 with a view to making a recommendation thereon for consideration and adoption by the CMA.
	VI.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
		(Agenda item 6)
		1.	Proceedings
			35.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda item. Representatives of two Parties made statements, including on behalf of the LMDCs. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Madeleine Diouf Sarr (Senegal) and Mr. Peer Stiansen (Norway). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			36.	The SBI continued its deliberations in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 29, referring to Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
			37.	It took note of the views expressed by Parties at the session and in their submissions under this agenda item.
			38.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 48 drawing upon the informal note on the negotiations under this agenda item prepared by the co-facilitators, under their own responsibility, on the basis of Parties’ deliberations at sessions of the SBI and the views they have submitted.
	VII.	Development of modalities and procedures for the operation and use of a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement
		(Agenda item 7)
		1.	Proceedings
			39.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Diouf Sarr and Mr. Stiansen. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			40.	The SBI continued its deliberations on a public registry referred to in Article 7, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement.
			41.	It took note of the views expressed by Parties at the session and in their submissions under this agenda item.
			42.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 48 drawing upon the informal note on the negotiations under this agenda item prepared by the co-facilitators, under their own responsibility, on the basis of Parties’ deliberations at sessions of the SBI and the views they have submitted.
	VIII.	Matters relating to the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol
		(Agenda item 8)
		A.	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism
			(Agenda sub-item 8(a))
			43.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and agreed to postpone its consideration of the matter to SBI 48.
		B.	Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol
			(Agenda sub-item 8(b))
			44.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.11.
	IX.	Coordination of support for the implementation of activities in relation to mitigation actions in the forest sector by developing countries, including institutional arrangements
		(Agenda item 9)
			45.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. Representatives of two Parties made statements. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Mr. Keith Anderson (Switzerland) and Mr. Ayman Cherkaoui (Morocco). At the 3rd meeting, the Chair reported that the consultations had not resulted in any conclusions. In accordance with rules 10(c) and 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included on the provisional agenda for SBI 48.
	X.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
		(Agenda item 10)
		1.	Proceedings
			46.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2017/14 and FCCC/SB/2017/2/Add.1–FCCC/SBI/2017/14/Add.1. Representatives of three Parties made statements. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Mr. Abias Huongo (Angola), Chair of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG), to report on the group’s activities. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Mamadou Honadia (Burkina Faso) and Mr. Malcolm Ridout (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
			47.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI also agreed that the group established under this agenda item would meet jointly with the group established under SBI agenda item 12, “Report of the Adaptation Committee”, to consider the joint recommendations prepared by the LEG and the Adaptation Committee (AC) for consideration and adoption at CMA 1 in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 41 and 45 (see chapter XII below). At its 5th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			48.	The SBI welcomed the report on the 32nd meeting of the LEG, held in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, from 7 to 10 August 2017.
			49.	The SBI noted that the LEG had completed its work, together with the AC, on the recommendations to the CMA in response to decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 41 and 45. It expressed its appreciation for the technical work undertaken by the LEG.
			50.	The SBI initiated its consideration of the recommendations referred to in paragraph 49 above and took note of the conclusions under its agenda item 12 as they relate to the outcome of the joint meetings with regard to the recommendations (see para. 79 below).
			51.	The SBI expressed its gratitude to:
				(a)	The Government of Haiti for hosting the 32nd meeting of the LEG, referred to in paragraph 48 above;
				(b)	The Government of the Philippines for hosting the regional training workshop on national adaptation plans (NAPs) for the Asian region in Manila from 13 to 16 June 2017;
				(c)	The Government of Fiji for hosting the regional training workshop on NAPs for the Pacific region in Nadi from 10 to 13 July 2017;
				(d)	The Government of Costa Rica for hosting the regional training workshop on NAPs for the Latin American and Caribbean region in San José from 4 to 7 September 2017;
				(e)	The Government of Morocco for hosting the regional training workshop on NAPs for francophone African countries in Rabat from 25 to 27 September 2017.
			52.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to the LEG and the secretariat for their work on supporting the process to formulate and implement NAPs, including through the regional training workshops on NAPs referred to in paragraph 51(b–e) above, and invited the LEG to continue the training under its work programme.
			53.	The SBI also expressed its appreciation to the LEG for coordinating training and other activities with relevant organizations in supporting the LDCs on adaptation.
			54.	The SBI further expressed its appreciation to the LEG for including an item on access to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme on the agendas for the regional training workshops on NAPs and NAP Expos and for the successful collaboration with the GCF secretariat.
			55.	The SBI welcomed the work of the LEG in accordance with its mandate in providing technical guidance and advice on accessing funding from the GCF for the process to formulate and implement NAPs in collaboration with the GCF secretariat.
			56.	The SBI took note of the preparations for the NAP Expo that is planned to take place from 4 to 6 April 2018 in Bonn, Germany, and invited Parties and relevant organizations to assist in the organization of and participate in the event.
			57.	The SBI noted with appreciation the financial pledge of EUR 50 million made by Germany to the Least Developed Countries Fund and urged additional contributions to the fund.
			58.	The SBI requested the secretariat to prepare a report on the provisions for support and flexibility provided to the LDCs under the Convention and the Paris Agreement and on how the provisions can assist the LDCs in making a smooth transition from LDC status, in the light of United Nations General Assembly resolution A/67/221.
			59.	The SBI requested the LEG to continue to prioritize the activities in its work programme, subject to the availability of resources.
			60.	The SBI invited Parties and relevant organizations to continue to provide resources in support of the implementation of the LEG work programme.
	XI.	National adaptation plans
		(Agenda item 11)
		1.	Proceedings
			61.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2017/14, FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.12 and FCCC/SB/2017/2. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Pepetua Latasi (Tuvalu) and Mr. Ridout. At its 5th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			62.	The SBI welcomed the information paper on progress in the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
			63.	The SBI also welcomed the progress made by some developing countries in the process to formulate and implement NAPs, and noted that more than half of developing countries had initiated or launched the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
			64.	The SBI took note of the submission by Chile, Kenya and State of Palestine of their NAPs, via NAP Central, bringing the total number of submitted NAPs to eight.
			65.	The SBI noted the approval, as at 30 October 2017, by the GCF of 10 out of 38 funding proposals through the GCF Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme to support the formulation of NAPs, as well as the approval by the GEF of funding proposals from four countries to support the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
			66.	The SBI recognized that many developing country Parties continue to face challenges in accessing funding from the GCF for the formulation and implementation of NAPs.
			67.	The SBI welcomed the successful conduct of the regional NAP Expos that took place on 28 June 2017 in Kampala, Uganda, and on 11 and 12 September 2017 in Seoul, Republic of Korea, and the active participation therein of developing countries and other relevant stakeholders.
			68.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to the Governments of Uganda and the Republic of Korea for hosting the regional NAP Expos referred to in paragraph 67 above.
			69.	The SBI welcomed the successful conduct of the following regional training workshops on NAPs conducted by the LEG as part of its work programme for 2017–2018:
				(a)	For the Asian region, held in Manila from 13 to 16 June 2017;
				(b)	For the Pacific region, held in Nadi from 10 to 13 July 2017;
				(c)	For the Latin American and Caribbean region, held in San José from 4 to 7 September 2017;
				(d)	For francophone African countries, held in Rabat from 25 to 27 September 2017.
			70.	The SBI also welcomed the progress made by the AC and the LEG in their respective engagement with the GCF on ways to enhance the process to access support for the formulation and implementation of NAPs.
			71.	The SBI further welcomed the work of the AC on the information paper on the experience of countries in accessing the GCF Readiness Programme for adaptation, including for the process to formulate and implement NAPs, and noted that the information paper will inform the workshop planned to take place during the NAP Expo 2018 with a view to informing the assessment of progress in the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
			72.	The SBI welcomed the work of the LEG in providing technical guidance and advice on accessing funding from the GCF for the process to formulate and implement NAPs in collaboration with the GCF secretariat, in accordance with the mandate of the LEG, and invited the LEG to include an item on the experience of countries in accessing support for NAPs from the GCF in the programme for the NAP Expo 2018.
			73.	The SBI also invited the AC and the LEG, following the NAP Expo 2018, to consider ways to assist with the implementation of NAPs in their future work programmes and to include information thereon in their reports, as appropriate.
			74.	The SBI further invited Parties to continue to provide information on progress towards the achievement of the objectives of the process to formulate and implement NAPs and on experience, best practices, lessons learned, gaps and needs, and support provided and received in the process to formulate and implement NAPs via the online questionnaire on NAP Central.
	XII.	Report of the Adaptation Committee
(Agenda item 12)
		1.	Proceedings
			75.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SB/2017/2 and FCCC/SB/2017/2/Add.1–FCCC/SBI/2017/14/Add.1. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Mr. Clifford Mahlung (Jamaica), Co-Chair of the AC, to report on the committee’s activities. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed that this agenda item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 47 agenda item 4 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Richard Merzian (Australia) and Mr. Hamza Tber (Morocco).
			76.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI also agreed that the group established under this agenda item would meet jointly with the group established under SBI agenda item 10, “Matters relating to the least developed countries”, to consider the joint recommendations prepared by the LEG and the AC for consideration and adoption at CMA 1 in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 41 and 45 (see chapter X above). At its 5th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			77.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the report of the AC.
			78.	The SBI and the SBSTA expressed their appreciation for the technical work undertaken by the AC. They noted that the AC has completed its work on the recommendations to the CMA in response to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 42, as well as its work, together with the LEG, on the recommendations to the CMA in response to decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 41 and 45.
			79.	The SBI and the SBSTA initiated their consideration of the recommendations referred to in paragraph 78 above, including through joint meetings with the group established under SBI agenda item 10 on the joint recommendations of the AC and the LEG for consideration and adoption by the CMA.
			80.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue their consideration of this matter at 
SBI 48 and SBSTA 48 (April–May 2018) with a view to making a recommendation to be
forwarded at COP 24 for consideration and adoption at CMA 1.
	XIII.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 13)
		81.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2017/1 and Add.1. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Mr. Orville Grey (Jamaica), Co-Chair of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts, to report on the activities of the Executive Committee. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed that this agenda item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 47 agenda item 5 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Beth Lavender (Canada) and Mr. Alf Wills (South Africa).
		82.	At its 5th meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on the Warsaw International Mechanism for consideration and adoption at COP 23.
		83.	At the same meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to recommend to the COP that the expert dialogue referred to in paragraph 9 of the above-mentioned draft decision be named the Suva expert dialogue and that the clearing house for risk transfer referred to in paragraph 2 of the same text, operationalized by the Executive Committee and launched during the session, be named the Fiji Clearing House for Risk Transfer.
	XIV.	Development and transfer of technologies
(Agenda item 14)
		A.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network
(Agenda sub-item 14(a))
			84.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2017/3. Representatives of one Party made statements. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this agenda sub-item would be considered together with equally titled SBSTA 47 agenda sub-item 6(a) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Balisi Gopolang (Botswana) and Ms. Elfriede More (Austria). At its 5th meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on enhancing climate technology development and transfer through the Technology Mechanism for consideration and adoption at COP 23.
		B.	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer 
(Agenda sub-item 14(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				85.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/CP/2017/7/Add.1 and FCCC/SB/2017/3. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Stella Gama (Malawi) and Mr. Kunihiko Shimada (Japan). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				86.	The SBI welcomed the report of the GEF, including the information on progress in relation to the Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer (PSP) and related challenges and lessons learned.
				87.	The SBI also welcomed the ongoing collaboration between the PSP climate technology transfer and finance centres and the Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN), including on responses to developing country requests for technical assistance, and encouraged them to continue this collaboration.
				88.	The SBI noted the information in the report referred to in paragraph 86 above on the terminal evaluation of phase I of the global technology needs assessment (TNA) project. The SBI invited Parties participating in phase III of the global TNA project to consider the findings of the terminal evaluation.
				89.	The SBI recommended that the COP invite the GEF to allocate provisions in the climate change focal area of its seventh replenishment for supporting developing country Parties in undertaking TNAs and piloting priority technology projects to foster innovation and investment.
				90.	The SBI also recommended that the COP invite the GEF to include information in its reports to the COP on:
					(a)	The collaboration between the GEF focal points and the national designated entities for technology development and transfer, as communicated by the CTCN to the GEF;
					(b)	Whether and how Parties have used their System for Transparent Allocation of Resources allocation for piloting the implementation of the TNA results;
					(c)	The outcomes of the collaboration referred to in paragraph 87 above.
				91.	The SBI welcomed the midterm evaluations of the pilot projects of the fourth replenishment of the GEF included in the report referred to in paragraph 86 above. It reiterated its encouragement to the GEF to share the midterm evaluations of the PSP climate technology transfer and finance centres and the aforementioned pilot projects as soon as available in order for the Technology Executive Committee (TEC) to update the evaluation report on the PSP.
				92.	The SBI noted the ongoing work of the TEC in updating its report on the evaluation of the PSP in accordance with the invitation of SBI 43. The SBI invited the TEC to submit the evaluation report as part of its annual report to the COP for consideration at the session of the SBI to be held in December 2018.
	XV.	Matters relating to climate finance
(Agenda item 15)
		A.	Review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance
(Agenda sub-item 15(a))
			93.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/TP/2017/4 and FCCC/TP/2017/9. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Delphine Eyraud (France) and Ms. Olai Uludong (Palau). At the 5th meeting, the Chair reminded Parties that the SBI had been requested to complete its work at the session and to recommend a draft decision thereon for consideration and adoption at COP 23. The Chair noted that Parties had not been able to conclude their consideration of this matter and informed Parties that the consideration would continue under the guidance of the COP Presidency.
			B.	Third review of the Adaptation Fund
(Agenda sub-item 15(b))
				94.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/TP/2017/6. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Patience Damptey (Ghana) and Ms. Gemma O’Reilly (Ireland). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on the third review of the Adaptation Fund for consideration and adoption at CMP 13.
	XVI.	Matters relating to capacity-building
(Agenda item 16)
		A.	Capacity-building under the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 16(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				95.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2017/9. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Jeniffer Hanna Collado (Dominican Republic) and Mr. Makoto Kato (Japan). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				Capacity-building in developing countries under the Convention
					96.	The SBI welcomed the synthesis report prepared to facilitate the annual monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries established under decision 2/CP.7, and the summary report on the 6th Durban Forum on capacity-building.
					97.	The SBI reiterated the value of the objective and scope of capacity-building in developing countries as contained in decision 2/CP.7, and noted that some progress has been made in the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries at the institutional, systemic and individual level.
					98.	The SBI recognized the Durban Forum on capacity-building as a means of effective and continuous sharing of information, good practices and lessons learned among a wide spectrum of stakeholders operating under and outside the Convention.
					99.	The SBI noted that the objective and scope of capacity-building in developing countries as contained in decision 2/CP.7 are still relevant, and also noted that current and emerging areas in the context of the Convention and the Paris Agreement should also be taken into account in the further implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries.
					100.	The SBI recalled that, as per decision 16/CP.22, the Paris Committee on Capacity-building (PCCB) aims to address both current and emerging gaps and needs in implementing capacity-building in developing country Parties and to further enhance capacity-building efforts with regard to coherence and coordination in capacity-building activities under the Convention.
					101.	The SBI invited Parties and observers to submit, by 16 February 2018, their views on potential topics for the 7th meeting of the Durban Forum on capacity-building, to take place at SBI 48, that are thematically aligned with the 2017–2018 focus area or theme of the PCCB.
				Capacity-building in countries with economies in transition under the Convention
					102.	The SBI concluded its work on the fourth review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in countries with economies in transition established under decision 3/CP.7, in accordance with decision 21/CP.18, paragraph 4.
					103.	The SBI took note of the information provided by Parties and the submissions received in response to the invitations of the COP. It also took note of and welcomed the compilation and synthesis report containing information on the implementation of capacity-building activities in countries with economies in transition that are currently receiving support.
					104.	The SBI recommended a draft decision on the fourth review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in countries with economies in transition for consideration and adoption at COP 23.
			B.	Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building
(Agenda sub-item 16(b))
				105.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2017/11. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Rita Mishaan (Guatemala) and Mr. Paul Watkinson (France). As Ms. Mishaan had to leave the conference owing to an injury, 
Ms. Collado agreed, at the Chair’s invitation, to replace her from 7 November onward. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on the annual technical progress report of the PCCB for 2017 for consideration and adoption at COP 23.
			C.	Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 16(c))
				1.	Proceedings
					106.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2017/9. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Ms. Collado and Mr. Kato. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					Capacity-building in developing countries under the Kyoto Protocol
						107.	The SBI welcomed the synthesis report prepared to facilitate the annual monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries established under decision 2/CP.7 and reaffirmed under decision 29/CMP.1, and the summary report on the 6th Durban Forum on capacity-building.
						108.	The SBI reiterated the value of the objective and scope of capacity-building in developing countries as contained in decisions 2/CP.7 and 29/CMP.1, and noted that some progress has been made in the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries at the institutional, systemic and individual level.
						109.	The SBI recognized the Durban Forum on capacity-building as a means of effective and continuous sharing of information, good practices and lessons learned among a wide spectrum of stakeholders operating under and outside the Kyoto Protocol.
						110.	The SBI noted that the objective and scope of the needs and priority areas identified in the framework for capacity-building in developing countries established under decision 2/CP.7 and the priority areas for capacity-building relating to the participation of developing countries in project activities under the clean development mechanism as contained in decision 29/CMP.1 are still relevant, and also noted that current and emerging areas should be taken into consideration in the further implementation of capacity-building activities in developing countries.
						111.	The SBI invited Parties and observers to submit, by 16 February 2018, their views on potential topics for the 7th meeting of the Durban Forum on capacity-building, to take place at SBI 48, that are thematically aligned with the 2017–2018 focus area or theme of the PCCB.
					Capacity-building in countries with economies in transition under the Kyoto Protocol
						112.	The SBI concluded its work on the fourth review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in countries with economies in transition established under decision 3/CP.7 under the Kyoto Protocol, in accordance with decision 11/CMP.8, paragraph 4.
						113.	The SBI took note of the information provided by Parties and the submissions received in response to the invitations of the CMP. It also took note of and welcomed the compilation and synthesis report containing information on the implementation of capacity-building activities in countries with economies in transition that are currently receiving support.
						114.	The SBI recommended a draft decision on the fourth review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in countries with economies in transition under the Kyoto Protocol for consideration and adoption at CMP 13.
	XVII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
(Agenda item 17)
		A.	Improved forum and work programme
(Agenda sub-item 17(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				115.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2017/INF.2 and the submissions related to the agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 47 agenda sub-item 9(a) and that it would establish a contact group to convene the 5th meeting of the improved forum, co-chaired by the Chair of the SBI and the Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize), and assisted by Ms. Nataliya Kushko (Ukraine) and Mr. Andrei Marcu (Panama). At its 5th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				116.	The SBI and the SBSTA convened the 4th meeting of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				117.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note with appreciation of the detailed report, prepared by the co-chairs of the ad hoc technical expert group (TEG), on the discussions of the TEG at its meeting held in Bonn, Germany, on 9 and 10 May 2017.
				118.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the views expressed by Parties on the usefulness of the meetings of the TEG at the forty-sixth sessions of the subsidiary bodies and decided to review the design of the TEG during the review of the work of the forum at the sessions of the subsidiary bodies to be held in December 2018.
				119.	The SBI and the SBSTA also took note of the views expressed by Parties and observers contained in their submissions on aspects related to economic diversification and transformation and just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs, in the context of sustainable development, with a view to informing the in-forum discussion on possible needs for modelling tools, including capacity-building opportunities, that took place at the sessions and the in-forum training workshop on the use of economic modelling tools to take place at SBI 48 and SBSTA 48.
				120.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the exchange of views during the in-forum discussion on possible needs for modelling tools, including capacity-building opportunities, related to the work programme of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures, as well as on the areas of the work programme.
				121.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the discussions on the needs expressed by some Parties for capacity-building for the assessment of the impacts of response measures, and acknowledging and enhancing existing capacity-building opportunities, including through cooperation on response measures. The SBI and the SBSTA invited the secretariat to collaborate with relevant intergovernmental and international organizations to raise awareness with a view to enhancing capacity-building programmes or activities for Parties in order to maximize the positive and minimize the negative impacts of response measures, with a view to informing the in-session discussions.
				122.	The SBI and the SBSTA noted the views expressed by Parties on the in-forum training workshop scheduled for their forty-eighth sessions, including but not limited to improving the existing modelling portal, data availability, and implications for regions, sectors and gender issues. They requested the secretariat to organize, under the guidance of the Chairs of the SBI and the SBSTA, a two-day training workshop on the use of economic modelling tools related to the areas of the work programme of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures, which will include experts invited from both developing and developed countries as well as from intergovernmental and international organizations. The SBI and the SBSTA also requested the secretariat to prepare a report on the workshop for consideration at the sessions of the SBI and the SBSTA to be held in December 2018.
				123.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties and observers to submit, by 30 March 2018, their views on the scope of the review of the work of the improved forum that will take place at the sessions of the SBI and the SBSTA to be held in December 2018, in line with the work programme, with a view to informing the in-forum discussions at their forty-eighth sessions.
				124.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the actions to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 121 and 122 above.
				125.	They requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures
			(Agenda sub-item 17(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				126.	The SBI considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 47 agenda sub‑item 9(b) in a contact group co-chaired by the Chairs of the SBI and the SBSTA, assisted by Ms. Kushko and Mr. Marcu. At its 5th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				127.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the submissions from Parties and observers and welcomed the views contained therein on this agenda sub-item.
				128.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the exchange of views that took place during the pre-sessional workshop on 4 and 5 November 2017, which focused on elements of the modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				129.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered with appreciation the updated reflections note prepared by their Chairs with the assistance of the co-facilitators and the secretariat, and welcomed the discussion during the sessions on the modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures. The SBI and the SBSTA agreed that the recommendation being prepared under this agenda sub-item for consideration and adoption at CMA 1 will include language for the CMA to take the necessary procedural steps to enable the forum to serve the Paris Agreement as per decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 33 and 34.
				130.	To facilitate deliberations at SBI 48 and SBSTA 48, the SBI and the SBSTA requested their Chairs to prepare an informal document containing draft elements of the recommendation, for consideration and adoption at CMA 1, on the modalities, work programme and functions of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures to address the effects of the implementation of response measures under the Paris Agreement, on the basis of prior submissions from Parties under this agenda sub-item and the informal note prepared by the co-facilitators.
		C.	Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol
			(Agenda sub-item 17(c))
		D.	Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10
			(Agenda sub-item 17(d))
			131.	The SBI considered agenda sub-items 17(c) and (d) at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to the Chair’s proposal that substantive discussions under these sub-items be held in the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures jointly with discussions on agenda sub-item 17(a). At the 3rd meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that no specific conclusions had been reached on the matters. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to continue its consideration of the matters at SBI 48.
	XVIII.	Ways of enhancing the implementation of education, training, public awareness, public participation and public access to information so as to enhance actions under the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 18)
		1.	Proceedings
			132.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations facilitated by Mr. Albert Magalang (Philippines). At its 3rd meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			133.	The SBI initiated its consideration of this matter in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 83.
			134.	The SBI took note of the views expressed by Parties during the session.
			135.	The SBI recognized the progress made by Parties and observers in implementing the Doha work programme on Article 6 of the Convention as reported during the intermediate review of the Doha work programme on Article 6 of the Convention at SBI 44.
			136.	The SBI recognized that the six elements of Action for Climate Empowerment (ACE) – education, training, public awareness, public participation, public access to information and international cooperation – are fundamental to enhancing the effective implementation of the Paris Agreement.
			137.	The SBI requested the secretariat to organize a workshop, preferably in session, or as appropriate, in conjunction with SBI 48 to develop a list of actions to enhance the implementation of the Paris Agreement through ACE-related activities, under the guidance of the SBI Chair and with the participation of Parties, representatives of relevant bodies established under the Convention, relevant experts, youth, practitioners and stakeholders.
			138.	The SBI invited Parties and observers to submit, by 26 January 2018, their views on the role of ACE and topics for the workshop referred to in paragraph 137 above that could enhance the implementation of ACE under the Paris Agreement.
			139.	The SBI requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
			140.	The SBI agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 48.
	XIX.	Report on activities related to Action for Climate Empowerment 
(Agenda item 19)
		141.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and took note of the summary report on the 5th ACE dialogue.
	XX.	Gender and climate change
(Agenda item 20)
		142.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. The representative of one Party made a statement. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Geert Fremout (Belgium) and Ms. Winfred Lichuma (Kenya). At its 5th meeting, the SBI recommended a draft decision on the establishment of a gender action plan for consideration and adoption at COP 23.
	XXI.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
(Agenda item 21)
		A.	Budget performance for the biennium 2016–2017
(Agenda item 21(a))
			B.	Audit report and financial statements for 2016
(Agenda item 21(b))
			C.	Programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019
(Agenda item 21(c))
			D.	Other budgetary and financial matters
(Agenda item 21(d))
				1.	Proceedings
					143.	The SBI considered these agenda sub-items at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2017/13, FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.13, FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.14 and FCCC/SBI/2017/INF.15 and Add.1. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited the UNFCCC Deputy Executive Secretary, Mr. Ovais Sarmat, to introduce sub-items 21(a), (c) and (d). At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the agenda sub-items in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Amena Yauvoli (Fiji) and Mr. Helmut Hojesky (Austria). At its 5th meeting, the Chair provided a brief oral report on the technical workshop that had been convened on Wednesday, 8 November, to discuss possible ways to increase the efficiency and transparency of the budget process. At the same meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					144.	The SBI discussed and considered the revised work programme for the biennium 2018–2019.
					145.	The SBI acknowledged that the revised work programme referred to in paragraph 144 above will continue to be guided by the mandates and terminology contained in decisions of the governing bodies and conclusions of the subsidiary bodies, and that it shall not prejudge the outcomes of negotiations and decisions or conclusions of those bodies at future sessions. The SBI noted that the secretariat will update programme and budget implementation accordingly and provide an update on such decisions and conclusions, as appropriate, in the budget performance report.
					146.	The SBI recommended that the COP, when adopting decision 21/CP.23, amend it by removing the following text from the third preambular paragraph: “and the revised work programme contained in document [xxx]”.
					147.	The SBI noted that it would continue to consider possible ways to increase the efficiency, transparency, knowledge and understanding of the ongoing budget process, starting at SBI 48.
					148.	The SBI also noted that the technical workshop on possible ways to increase the efficiency and transparency of the budget process organized by the secretariat on the margins of the session had contributed to enhancing Parties’ understanding of important budgetary matters.
					149.	The SBI further noted the need for Parties to consider the budgetary implications of decisions of the governing bodies and conclusions of the subsidiary bodies and to prioritize mandates given the increasing number of new and additional mandates being decided. It requested the secretariat to provide input on possible approaches to prioritization and on the budgetary implications of decisions of the governing bodies and conclusions of the subsidiary bodies for consideration at SBI 48.
					150.	The SBI recommended two draft decisions on administrative, financial and institutional matters: one for consideration and adoption at COP 23 and one for consideration and adoption at CMP 13.
	XXII.	Other matters
(Agenda item 22)
		151.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. A representative of one Party made a statement.
	XXIII.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 23)
		1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
			152.	At the 5th meeting of the SBI, a representative of the secretariat provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during the session in accordance with the provisions of rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
			153.	He informed the SBI that certain activities mandated at the session called for support by the secretariat and required additional resources over and above the approved core budget for the biennium 2018–2019: under agenda item 20, “Gender and climate change”, funding in the amount of EUR 280,000 will be required. He noted that this amount was preliminary and based on the information available at that time.
			154.	He also noted that the other additional requirements resulting from the session would be absorbed with existing resources.
			155.	He expressed the hope that the secretariat could count on the continued generosity of Parties and the provision of the additional funding needed in a timely and predictable manner. He also noted that without such funding the secretariat would not be in a position to provide the requested support.
		2.	Closure of and report on the session
			156.	At its 4th meeting, on 14 November, which was held jointly with the 4th meeting of the SBSTA, the SBI heard statements from Parties and observers. Statements were made by representatives of six Parties, including on behalf of the Umbrella Group, the European Union, the Alliance of Small Island States and the LDCs. Statements were also made by representatives of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, women and gender NGOs, youth NGOs, business and industry NGOs, environmental NGOs, farmers NGOs, local government and municipal authorities, and research and independent NGOs.,
			157.	At its 5th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session and to make it available to all Parties. At the same meeting, the Chair thanked Parties for their support and closed the session.
			
Annex
Summary report on the multilateral assessment of Belarus
at the forty-seventh session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation
	[English only]
	I.	Background
		1.	The Conference of the Parties, by decision 1/CP.16, decided that developed country Parties should enhance the reporting in their national communications and submit biennial reports on their progress in achieving emission reductions. It also established a new process under the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) – international assessment and review (IAR) – that aims to promote the comparability of efforts among all developed country Parties. According to the modalities and procedures for IAR specified in annex II to decision 2/CP.17, multilateral assessment (MA) is to be conducted for each developed country Party at a working group session of the SBI, with the participation of all Parties. The aim of the MA is to assess each Party’s progress in implementation towards the achievement of emission reductions and removals related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction target.
		2.	The second round of MA of Belarus took place at a working group session during SBI 47, on 10 November 2017. Such a working group session is preceded by a three-month period of questions and answers; in the first month, any Party may submit written questions to the Party being assessed, which may respond to the questions within the remaining two months. The MA of Belarus was originally planned to take place during SBI 46; however, owing to national circumstances, Belarus was not able to attend that session. Questions for Belarus had been submitted in writing two months before the working group session at SBI 46 by the following delegations: Brazil, China, European Union, France and Thailand. A list of the questions received and the answers provided by Belarus, as well as the webcast of the session, can be found on the IAR web page for Belarus. The Party can submit any other observations on its MA process within two months of the working group session.
	II.	Proceedings
		3.	The working group session was chaired by the SBI Chair, Mr. Tomasz Chruszczow. Belarus was represented by Mr. Andrei Pilipchuk, Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Protection.
		4.	Mr. Pilipchuk made an opening presentation, summarizing Belarus’ progress in implementation towards the achievement of emission reductions and removals related to its quantified economy-wide emission reduction target. Under the Convention, Belarus made a commitment to reduce its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 8.0 per cent by 2020 below the 1990 level.
		5.	Total GHG emissions excluding emissions and removals from land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) decreased by 34.6 per cent between 1990 and 2015 (from 136,914.91 to 89,607.64 kilotonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (kt CO2 eq)). The decrease in total GHG emissions can be attributed mainly to the decrease in fuel consumption in the energy sector related to the reduction in industrial production and the economic recession at the beginning of the 1990s, the implementation of energy-saving policies in various sectors of the economy, and changes in the structure of fuel consumption related to the switch from coal and fuel oil to natural gas.
		6.	Mr. Pilipchuk presented key policies and measures to achieve the target, including: the Renewable Energy Law (enforced in 2010), the Energy Savings Law (enforced in 2015), the State Programme on Sustainable Environment for 2015–2020, the State Programme on Energy Efficiency for 2015–2020, the Action Plan on Implementation of the Paris Agreement (adopted in February 2016) and the draft State Programme on Implementation of the Paris Agreement (prepared in September 2017), as well as the draft Strategy on Low Carbon Development up to 2050, the draft Strategy on Adaptation of Forestry up to 2030 and the draft Strategy on Adaptation of Agriculture up to 2030 (prepared in September 2017). Mr. Pilipchuk highlighted the success of the implementation of the new State Programme on Sustainable Environment for 2015–2020 and explained that the energy intensity and carbon intensity of the Belarusian economy (in relation to gross domestic product (GDP)) have been constantly decreasing since 1990. For example, carbon intensity decreased to 0.44 kg CO2/USD in 2015 from 2.6 kg CO2/USD in 1990. Mr. Pilipchuk emphasized the high mitigation potential of Belarus, which is about 30 Mt CO2 by 2030. Regarding the main challenges highlighted in the Party’s presentation, Mr. Pilipchuk referred to the low GDP per capita in the country (USD 4,900), the very limited institutional capacity in the field of climate change, and limited foreign investments in the country (6.5 per cent of GDP, or USD 680 per capita), which is much lower than in other countries with economies in transition.
		7.	On the use of units from LULUCF activities, during the review of its second biennial report Belarus confirmed that the contribution of the LULUCF sector is not considered in its emission reduction target. With regard to the use of units from market-based mechanisms under the Convention and other mechanisms, Belarus also confirmed that market-based mechanisms under the Convention are not applicable to the Party, and other market-based mechanisms are not used in Belarus.
		8.	Belarus’ total GHG emissions excluding LULUCF in 2020 and 2030 are projected to be 88,120.09 and 104,027.86 kt CO2 eq, respectively, under the ‘with measures’ scenario, which is a decrease of 36.7 and 25.2 per cent, respectively, below the 1990 level. Under the ‘with additional measures’ scenario, emissions in 2020 and 2030, amounting to 86,870.09 and 100,278.36 kt CO2 eq, respectively, are projected to be lower than those in 1990 by 37.6 and 27.9 per cent, respectively. The 2020 projections suggest that Belarus expects to overachieve its 2020 target under the Convention.
		9.	The opening presentation was followed by interventions and questions from the following delegations: Austria, European Union, India and United States of America. The questions were related to: the introduction of the policy on low-carbon and carbon-free technologies and the sectors where this policy will be implemented, as well as the results of the reductions or potential reductions in GHG emissions expected from the implementation of the related measures; the current progress of the renewable energy legislation and policies, the specific measures currently implemented, ways of strengthening the national energy policies and current progress towards the Party’s renewable energy objective; the mitigation measures that have been implemented in the transport and waste sectors and the plans to reduce GHG emissions in those sectors; the type of support currently provided to developing countries and whether there are plans to scale up such support; and the estimation of the climate benefits of the plan to ecologically rehabilitate disturbed wetlands between 2015 and 2030 and the extent of the use of the methodologies of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in the estimation of those climate benefits.
		10.	In response, Belarus provided further explanations. In particular, Belarus explained that without the use of carbon-free technologies the Party would not achieve the planned reductions in GHG emissions provided that the growth in GDP is maintained. Regarding the renewable energy legislation, Belarus confirmed the progress made in its implementation, namely an increase in the share of renewable energy in electricity production from 0.2 per cent in 2009 to 5.8 per cent in 2016, and explained that the objective for 2030 of a 15 per cent share of renewable energy has been revised in the draft Strategy on Low Carbon Development up to 2050 to a target of 22 per cent. Belarus also provided details on measures in the transport sector focused on the construction of infrastructure for electric cars and buses in cities with more than 400,000 inhabitants (18 such cities in the country) by 2020 and the construction of 25 electric car charging stations in cities with 50,000 inhabitants by 2020, which would result in a decrease in total GHG emissions of 4.5 per cent by 2020.
		11.	Regarding support provided to developing countries, Belarus indicated that this support is focused in particular on countries of the former Soviet Union and covers capacity-building, institutional strengthening, development of legislative frameworks, and graduate and postgraduate studies in a variety of fields, such as forestry (Belarus has more than 50 years of experience in this field), and these fields will be further developed to cover the industry, energy and transport sectors. Lastly, Belarus indicated that there are no established methods in the country for estimating climate change impacts and the benefits of the rehabilitation of disturbed wetlands and that it would welcome any international cooperation in this area.
		

