|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBI/2023/10 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 2 August 2023  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Implementation
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its fifty-eighth session, held in Bonn from 5 to 15 June 2023
	Contents
		Page
	Abbreviations and acronyms		4
		I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)		5
		II.	Organizational matters 
(Agenda item 2)		5
			A.	Adoption of the agenda		5
			B.	Organization of the work of the session		7
			C.	Election of officers other than the Chair		8
			D.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process		8
			E.	Mandated events		8
		III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda item 3)		9
			A.	Status of submission and review of national communications and biennial reports
from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		9
			B.	Compilations and syntheses of biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I
to the Convention		9
			C.	Reports on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties 
included in Annex I to the Convention		9
		IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda item 4)		9
			A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included
in Annex I to the Convention		9
			B.	Provision of financial and technical support		10
			C.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports
of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention		10
		V.	Reporting and review pursuant to Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: provision of financial
and technical support to developing country Parties for reporting and capacity‑building
(Agenda item 5)		10
		VI.	Review of the status of the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism 
(Agenda item 6)		10
		VII.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 7)		11
		VIII.	Work programme on just transition pathways 
referred to in the relevant paragraphs of decision 1/CMA.4
(Agenda item 8)		12
		IX.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures
serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 9)		13
		X.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security	
(Agenda item 10)		13
		XI.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation 
referred to in decision 7/CMA.3
(Agenda item 11)		14
		XII.	Review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee
(Agenda item 12)		15
		XIII.	Matters relating to the least developed countries 
(Agenda item 13)		15
		XIV.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism 
for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 14)		17
		XV.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology 
Mechanism: linkages between the Technology Mechanism and
the Financial Mechanism of the Convention 
(Agenda item 15)		18
		XVI.	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund 
(Agenda item 16)		18
		XVII.	Second review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance 
(Agenda item 17)		18
		XVIII.	Matters relating to capacity-building 
(Agenda item 18)		19
		XIX.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings 
(Agenda item 19)		21
		XX.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters 
(Agenda item 20)		25
			A.	Budgetary matters		25
			B.	Continuous review of the functions and operations of the secretariat		25
			C.	Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement		25
			D.	UNFCCC annual report		26
		XXI.	National adaptation plans 
(Agenda item 21)		26
		XXII.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 22)		26
		XXIII.	Closure of and report on the session 
(Agenda item 23)		26
	Addendum – FCCC/SBI/2023/10/Add.1
	Draft decisions forwarded for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
		
Abbreviations and acronyms
	| CMA | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement |
	| CMP | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol |
	| COP | Conference of the Parties |
	| GCF | Green Climate Fund |
	| GEF | Global Environment Facility |
	| LDC | least developed country |
	| LDCF | Least Developed Countries Fund |
	| LEG | Least Developed Countries Expert Group |
	| NAP | national adaptation plan |
	| NGO | non-governmental organization |
	| SB | sessions of the subsidiary bodies |
	| SBI | Subsidiary Body for Implementation |
	| SBSTA | Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice |
	| SCF | Standing Committee on Finance |
	
	
	I.	Opening of the session
(Agenda item 1)
		1.	SBI 58 was held at the World Conference Center Bonn in Bonn, Germany, from 5 to 15 June 2023.
		2.	The SBI Chair, Nabeel Munir (Pakistan), opened the session on Monday, 5 June, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Ayşin Turpanci (Türkiye) as Rapporteur.
		3.	The SBSTA Chair, also on behalf of the SBI Chair, recalled the recent passing of Muhammed Quamrul Islam Chowdhury from Bangladesh, a former delegate who was extensively involved in the UNFCCC process for many years, particularly in relation to adaptation. In his memory, the SBSTA Chair invited all delegates to observe a minute’s silence.
	II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
			4.	At its 1st meeting, on 5 June, the SBI considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations, and the supplementary provisional agenda. The supplementary provisional agenda was issued, in accordance with rule 12 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, in response to a request from Cuba on behalf of the Group of 77 and China to include an item entitled “National adaptation plans”.
			5.	The Chair explained that, after extensive consultations with Parties on the supplementary provisional agenda, more time was needed to consider the matter. He proposed that the SBI proceed with its work on the basis of the supplementary provisional agenda with a view to adopting the agenda at a meeting later in the session. He also proposed to hold consultations jointly with the SBSTA Chair on the way forward.
			6.	At the same meeting, statements were made by representatives of 29 Parties, including 14 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – People’s Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; Coalition for Rainforest Nations; Environmental Integrity Group; European Union and its member States; Group of 77 and China; Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; LDCs; Like-minded Developing Countries; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of five intergovernmental organizations: Global Climate Observing System, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, International Maritime Organization, World Climate Research Programme and World Meteorological Organization, and by representatives of eight UNFCCC constituencies: business and industry NGOs; children and youth NGOs; environmental NGOs; Indigenous Peoples organizations; local government and municipal authorities; research and independent NGOs; trade union NGOs; and women and gender constituency.
			7.	At the 2nd meeting, on 12 June, when the supplementary provisional agenda was proposed for adoption, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, on behalf of the Like-minded Developing Countries, requested, in accordance with rule 13 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, to include in the agenda an item entitled “Urgently scaling up financial support from developed country Parties in line with Article 4, paragraph 5, to enable implementation for developing countries in this critical decade”. Since some Parties objected to this, the Chair informed Parties that he would continue consultations on the way forward with a view to then swiftly adopting the agenda, and adjourned the meeting.
			8.	At the 3rd meeting, on 14 June, the Chair reported on the consultations, which had resulted in Parties reaching agreement on the adoption of the agenda. The Chair proposed that the SBI adopt the supplementary provisional agenda with the title of item 8 orally amended and with the exception of item 21, with the understanding that the discussions during the informal consultations at this session on the Sharm el-Sheikh mitigation ambition and implementation work programme would be reflected in an informal note jointly prepared by the SBI and SBSTA Chairs under their own authority.
			9.	As proposed by the Chair, the SBI adopted the agenda as follows:
				1.	Opening of the session.
				2.	Organizational matters:
					(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
					(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
					(c)	Election of officers other than the Chair;
					(d)	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process;
					(e)	Mandated events.
				3.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention:
					(a)	Status of submission and review of national communications and biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(b)	Compilations and syntheses of biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(c)	Reports on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention.
				4.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention:
					(a)	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(b)	Provision of financial and technical support;
					(c)	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention.
				5.	Reporting and review pursuant to Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: provision of financial and technical support to developing country Parties for reporting and capacity-building.
				6.	Review of the status of the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism.
				7.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement.*
				8.	Work programme on just transition pathways referred to in the relevant paragraphs of decision 1/CMA.4.*
				9.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement.*
				10.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security.*
				11.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3.*
				12.	Review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee.*
				13.	Matters relating to the least developed countries.
				14.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.*
				15.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism of the Convention.
				16.	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund.
				17.	Second review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance.
				18.	Matters relating to capacity-building.
				19.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings.
				20.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters:
					(a)	Budgetary matters;
					(b)	Continuous review of the functions and operations of the secretariat;
					(c)	Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement;
					(d)	UNFCCC annual report.
				21.	National adaptation plans.
				22.	Other matters.
				23.	Closure of and report on the session.
		B.	Organization of the work of the session
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			10.	At the 1st meeting of the SBI, which was held together with the 1st meeting of SBSTA 58, pending the adoption of the agenda and noting the strong will of Parties to make progress on all issues, the Chair proposed, and Parties agreed, to launch work on the basis of the supplementary provisional agenda (see para. 5 above).
			11.	The Chair encouraged Parties to engage constructively in the negotiations and respect meeting times and reminded them about the deadline for all groups to conclude their work by 6 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 June, to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary on Thursday, 15 June. He encouraged Parties to keep all informal consultations open to observers in accordance with established practice and relevant SBI conclusions.
			12.	On the proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to proceed on that basis and in line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
			13.	During these sessions, the SBI and SBSTA Chairs convened an informal stocktaking plenary, on 13 June, with the aim of facilitating openness, inclusiveness and transparency, to review the progress of the negotiations.
			14.	At the 4th meeting of the SBI, on 15 June, which was held together with the 4th meeting of SBSTA 58, statements were made by representatives of 25 Parties, including 14 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; Coalition for Rainforest Nations; Environmental Integrity Group; European Union and its member States; Group of 77 and China; Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; LDCs; Like-minded Developing Countries; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of eight UNFCCC constituencies: business and industry NGOs; children and youth NGOs; environmental NGOs; Indigenous Peoples organizations; local government and municipal authorities; research and independent NGOs; trade union NGOs; and women and gender constituency.
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			15.	At the 3rd meeting, the Chair recalled that the SBI was expected to elect its Vice-Chair and Rapporteur for 2023. At that meeting, the SBI elected Gonzalo Guaiquil (Chile) as its Vice-Chair for 2023, but the Chair informed Parties that the secretariat had not received any nominations for SBI Rapporteur. In accordance with rule 22, paragraph 2, of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the serving Rapporteur, Ayşin Turpanci, will remain in office until her successor has been elected at SBI 59 (November–December 2023).
		D.	Facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process
(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
			16.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI took note of the information provided by its Chair on the fourteenth workshop for the facilitative sharing of views under the international consultation and analysis process, which was to take place from 6 to 7 June 2023 featuring 15 Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention.
		E.	Mandated events
(Agenda sub-item 2(e))
			17.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI took note of the information provided by its Chair on the mandated events being held in conjunction with this session.
	III.	Reporting from and review of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 3)
		A.	Status of submission and review of national communications and biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(a))
		B.	Compilations and syntheses of biennial reports from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(b))
		C.	Reports on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 3(c))
			18.	The documents considered at this session are available on the UNFCCC website. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to the Chair’s proposal to conduct consultations on the way forward for sub-items 3(a–c).
			19.	At the 4th meeting, the Chair reported on the consultations, on the basis of which the SBI took note of:
				(a)	The note entitled “Status of submission and review of national communications and biennial reports” (for sub-item 3(a));
				(b)	The revised report entitled “Compilation and synthesis of fourth biennial reports of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention” (for sub-item 3(b));
				(c)	The report entitled “National greenhouse gas inventory data for the period 1990–2020” (for sub-item 3(c)).
			20.	Representatives of two Parties made statements.
	IV.	Reporting from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 4)
		A.	Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 4(a))
			21.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to the Chair’s proposal to conduct consultations on the way forward for this sub-item, which had been held in abeyance since SBI 24. At the 4th meeting, the Chair reported on the consultations, on the basis of which the SBI noted the status of national communications and biennial update reports from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention and agreed to include this matter in the provisional agenda for SBI 59.
		B.	Provision of financial and technical support
(Agenda sub-item 4(b))
			22.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Rachel Eve Deakin (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) and Sandra Boitumelo Motshwanedi (South Africa).
			23.	The SBI engaged in constructive discussions on the matter at this session and, at its 4th meeting, agreed to continue consideration thereof at SBI 59 taking into account the draft text prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda item at this session.
		C.	Summary reports on the technical analysis of biennial update reports of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 4(c))
			24.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to the Chair’s proposal to conduct consultations on the way forward for this sub-item. At the 4th meeting, the Chair reported on the consultations, on the basis of which the SBI took note of the summary reports finalized up to 22 March 2023 and published on the UNFCCC website.
	V.	Reporting and review pursuant to Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: provision of financial and technical support to developing country Parties for reporting and capacity‑building
(Agenda item 5)
		25.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Rachel Eve Deakin and Sandra Boitumelo Motshwanedi.
		26.	The SBI engaged in constructive discussions on the matter at this session and, at its 4th meeting, agreed to continue consideration thereof at SBI 59 taking into account the submissions received prior to that session on how to address challenges faced by developing country Parties in implementing the enhanced transparency framework in a sustainable manner, including establishment and enhancement of national reporting systems within their respective Governments.
	VI.	Review of the status of the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism
(Agenda item 6)
		27.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Kate Hancock (Australia) and Sonam Tashi (Bhutan).
		28.	The SBI initiated discussions on the matter and, at its 4th meeting, agreed to continue consideration thereof at SBI 59.
	VII.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement*
(Agenda item 7)
		1.	Proceedings
			29.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 58 agenda item 8 in a joint contact group co-chaired by Alison Campbell (United Kingdom) and Joseph Teo (Singapore). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			30.	The SBI and the SBSTA emphasized the importance of the global stocktake for achieving the purpose and long-term goals of the Paris Agreement.
			31.	The SBI and the SBSTA expressed appreciation to the co-facilitators of the technical dialogue under the global stocktake for delivering the third and final meeting of the dialogue, and to facilitators, participating experts, Parties and non-Party stakeholders for their contributions to and engagement in that meeting.
			32.	The SBI and the SBSTA also expressed appreciation to the co-facilitators of the technical dialogue for preparing the summary report on the second meeting of the dialogue, the informal consultations on that report, held on 12 April 2023, and the informal consultations, held on 10 May 2023, on the information note on the third meeting of the dialogue.
			33.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the co-facilitators of the technical dialogue to prepare the summary report on the third meeting of the technical dialogue by 15 August 2023 and the factual synthesis report by 8 September 2023.
			34.	The SBI and the SBSTA expressed appreciation to their Chairs for holding a consultation, in hybrid format, from 27 to 28 April 2023, on preparations for the consideration of outputs component of the first global stocktake and welcomed the rich discussions that took place. They noted the summary report on the consultation.
			35.	The SBI and the SBSTA also noted the update provided by the high-level committee referred to in paragraph 33 of decision 19/CMA.1, on 13 June 2023, on progress in planning its high-level events and encouraged the high-level committee to continue to engage Parties and non-Party stakeholders in its activities.
			36.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the views exchanged on the indicative draft structure of a draft decision on the global stocktake for consideration and adoption at CMA 5 (November–December 2023) and agreed to accelerate their work on the consideration of outputs component. They noted the indicative draft structure of the draft CMA 5 decision on the global stocktake contained in an informal note prepared by the co-chairs of the contact group for this agenda item at this session.
			37.	The SBI and the SBSTA thanked their Chairs for organizing an intersessional in‑person workshop, to be held in October 2023, to develop elements for the consideration of outputs component of the first global stocktake, which will inform the work of the joint contact group on the global stocktake. In addition, they:
				(a)	Invited Parties and non-Party stakeholders to submit views on the elements for the consideration of outputs component by 15 September 2023 via the submission portal taking into consideration the informal note referred to in paragraph 36 above;
				(b)	Requested the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies, to prepare a synthesis report on the submissions and to make it available on the UNFCCC website three weeks before the workshop.
			38.	The SBI and the SBSTA encouraged Parties and non-Party stakeholders to hold events, at the local, national, regional and international level, as appropriate, in support of the first global stocktake.
			39.	The SBI and the SBSTA reiterated their encouragement to Parties to make voluntary contributions for the timely implementation of activities included in these conclusions and under the first global stocktake.
	VIII.	Work programme on just transition pathways referred to in the relevant paragraphs of decision 1/CMA.4*
(Agenda item 8)
		1.	Proceedings
			40.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 58 agenda item 9 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Marianne Karlsen (Norway) and Selam Kidane Abebe (Zambia). As Marianne Karlsen could not stay for the entire session, she was later replaced by Luisa Roelke (Germany). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			41.	The SBI and the SBSTA initiated consideration of the work programme on just transition pathways referred to in paragraph 52 of decision 1/CMA.4.
			42.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue work on this matter at SB 59 (November–December 2023), informed by the informal note available on the UNFCCC website, with a view to recommending a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption at CMA 5.
			43.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal by 15 September 2023 views on different elements of the work programme referred to in paragraph 41 above and requested the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on Parties’ submissions with a view to informing Parties’ further discussions on the work programme during the workshop referred to in paragraph 44 below.
			44.	The SBI and the SBSTA also requested the secretariat to organize, under the guidance of their Chairs, a workshop to be held before SB 59 on the work programme referred to in paragraph 41 above to inform further work thereunder, based on the submissions and synthesis report referred to in paragraph 43 above, ensuring broad participation of Parties and observers. They further requested the secretariat to prepare, under the guidance of their Chairs, a summary report on the workshop.
			45.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 43–44 above.
			46.	They requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	IX.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement*
(Agenda item 9)
		1.	Proceedings
			47.	The document considered at this session is available on the UNFCCC website. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 58 agenda item 11 in a joint contact group co-chaired by Catherine Goldberg (United States of America) and Peter Govindasamy (Singapore). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			48.	The SBI and the SBSTA convened at these sessions a meeting of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
			49.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the forum’s in-session workshop on country-driven strategies for just transition and economic diversification focusing on challenges and opportunities and expressed their gratitude to the experts for their contributions to the workshop.
			50.	The SBI and the SBSTA:
				(a)	Continued their consideration of the midterm review of the workplan of the forum and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures;
				(b)	Deliberated on the views on and guiding questions for the review of the functions, work programme and modalities of the forum.
			51.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SB 59.
	X.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security*
(Agenda item 10)
		1.	Proceedings
			52.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 58 agenda item 10 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Lucia Perugini (Italy) and Milagros Sandoval (Peru). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			53.	The SBI and the SBSTA established at these sessions the Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security.
			54.	They welcomed the submissions from Parties and observers on the elements of that joint work, including views on topics for the workshops referred to in paragraph 15(b) of decision 3/CP.27.
			55.	They also welcomed the submissions from Parties and observers on the operationalization of the Sharm el-Sheikh online portal referred to in paragraph 16 of decision 3/CP.27.
			56.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SB 59.
	XI.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3*
(Agenda item 11)
		1.	Proceedings
			57.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 58 agenda item 5 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Janine Elizabeth Felson (Belize) and Mattias Frumerie (Sweden). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			58.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the progress in the implementation of the Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation and the fifth and sixth workshops held under the work programme in the first half of 2023.
			59.	The SBI and the SBSTA expressed appreciation to their Chairs for providing guidance on the workshops referred to in paragraph 58 above, to the secretariat for conducting the workshops and implementing interactive modalities for participation, and to Parties and non‑Party stakeholders for contributing to and engaging in the workshops.
			60.	The SBI and the SBSTA also expressed appreciation to the Governments of Maldives and Germany for hosting the fifth and sixth workshops respectively under the Glasgow–‍‍Sharm el-Sheikh work programme.
			61.	The SBI and the SBSTA reiterated that the development of the framework for guiding the achievement of the global goal on adaptation and the review of overall progress in achieving it is to be undertaken through a structured approach and may take into consideration, inter alia, the elements referred to in paragraph 10 of decision 3/CMA.4.
			62.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited their Chairs to continue considering, at the remaining workshops under the Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme, matters related to the framework referred to in paragraph 61 above, inter alia, the development and use of targets, indicators and metrics, global adaptation priorities, and modalities for increasing international cooperation in support of the framework, and to include in the workshops sessions for Parties to explore areas of commonality in developing the framework and taking stock of progress.
			63.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the views presented by Parties during these sessions, which can be considered during the remainder of the work programme and in the development of the framework referred to in paragraph 61 above, including to serve as input to discussions during the seventh and eighth workshops, recognizing that these views do not capture all those of Parties and do not represent consensus.
			64.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the possible structural elements, outlined below, for a draft decision for consideration and adoption at CMA 5:
				(a)	Preamble;
				(b)	Acknowledgement of progress and conclusions under the Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation;
				(c)	Establishment of the framework for the global goal on adaptation;
				(d)	Elements of the framework for the global goal on adaptation:
					(i)	Purpose;
					(ii)	Dimensions;
					(iii)	Themes;
					(iv)	General and cross-cutting considerations;
					(v)	Enabling conditions (option 1) or means of implementation (option 2);
					(vi)	Reporting;
				(e)	Overarching targets and specific targets, indicators and metrics (option 1) or shared adaptation priorities under the framework for the global goal on adaptation (option 2);
				(f)	Link to the global stocktake;
				(g)	International cooperation and the role of stakeholders;
				(h)	Follow-up work (option 1) or no section on follow-up work (option 2);
				(i)	Finance and budgetary provisions (option 1) or no section on finance and budgetary provisions (option 2).
			65.	The SBI and the SBSTA recalled paragraph 18 of decision 3/CMA.4, inviting Parties and observers to submit views on the outcomes of and work conducted under the Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme, and further invited Parties to provide additional views on the draft decision for consideration and adoption at CMA 5 considering the possible structural elements set out in paragraph 64 above.
	XII.	Review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee*
(Agenda item 12)
		66.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 58 agenda item 4 in informal consultations co-facilitated by María del Pilar Bueno (Argentina) and Morgane Chiocchia (United Kingdom).
		67.	The SBI and the SBSTA continued consideration of this matter. At their 4th meeting, they agreed to continue consideration thereof at SB 59 on the basis of the draft text elements prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda item at these sessions, as amended by Parties and groups of Parties at the sessions.
	XIII.	Matters relating to the least developed countries
(Agenda item 13)
		1.	Proceedings
			68.	The document considered at this session is available on the UNFCCC website. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Jens Fugl (Denmark) and Bob Natifu (Uganda). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			69.	The SBI welcomed the report on the 43rd meeting of the LEG, held in Moroni from 15 to 20 February 2023.
			70.	The SBI also welcomed the successful conduct of the NAP writing workshop for African LDCs and Haiti, held in Moroni from 21 to 24 February 2023, for developing existing project ideas and formulating new ones for submission for funding.
			71.	The SBI further welcomed the successful conduct of the NAP Expo in Santiago from 27 to 30 March 2023 and acknowledged that the NAP Expo provided valuable technical insights into the entire adaptation cycle, notably the implementation stage.
			72.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to the Government of the Comoros for hosting LEG 43 and the NAP writing workshop referred to in paragraphs 70 and 71 respectively and to the organizations that provided technical assistance to LDC representatives during the workshop. It also expressed its appreciation to the Government of Chile for hosting the NAP Expo referred to in paragraph 72 and to the organizations, bodies, and regional centres and networks involved in organizing the event.
			73.	The SBI further expressed its appreciation to the LEG and the secretariat for their invaluable work in supporting the LDCs as an important group of countries for the focus of the provision of support under the Convention and the Paris Agreement. It welcomed the two-year rolling work programme of the LEG for 2023–2024.
			74.	The SBI took note of the work of the LEG on providing technical guidance and support to the LDCs for integrating gender considerations into the formulation and implementation of NAPs and on providing information on participation in LEG events with a view to promoting women’s engagement. It expressed its appreciation for the commitment of the LEG to strengthening the integration of a gender perspective into its work.
			75.	The SBI welcomed the vision of the LEG for supporting adaptation in the LDCs.
			76.	The SBI also welcomed the priorities and needs identified by the LDCs and requested the LEG to consider them in prioritizing the activities under its work programme.
			77.	The SBI noted that:
				(a)	As at 20 April 2023, the LDCs had submitted a total of 48 readiness proposals to the GCF for funding for the formulation of NAPs or other adaptation planning processes, of which 30 had been approved and for 26 of which the disbursement of funds had started;
				(b)	As at 12 June 2023, of the 46 LDCs, 19 had submitted a NAP since the establishment of the process to formulate and implement NAPs in 2010, 16 were in the process of formulating NAPs and 11 had yet to start formulating NAPs;
				(c)	As at 20 April 2023, of the 19 LDCs that had submitted a NAP, 17 had prepared and submitted a total of 27 proposals, related to addressing climate risks in the areas of agriculture, energy, health and water resources, for accessing funding from the GCF for implementing priority actions identified in their NAPs and for 14 of those LDCs their proposals for funding had been approved by the GCF;
				(d)	As at 12 June 2023, 40 of the 46 LDCs had developed a total of 89 project ideas under the NAP implementation pipeline development initiative, of which 3, by the Central African Republic, Ethiopia and Togo, had been successfully developed into concept notes, with corresponding requests for funding submitted to the GCF in the case of the Central African Republic and Togo; and 1, by Bhutan, had been successfully converted into a project proposal with a corresponding request for funding submitted to and approved by the GEF for funding under the LDCF.
			78.	The SBI also noted that between June 2018 and July 2022 the GEF provided grant funding through the LDCF of USD 523.4 million for 87 projects of the LDCs, some of which include actions related to the formulation and implementation of NAPs.
			79.	The SBI requested the LEG to continue enhancing efforts to support the LDCs that have yet to make progress in the process to formulate and implement NAPs. It invited United Nations agencies and organizations, and regional centres and networks to provide targeted support to those countries with a view to ‘leaving no one behind’.
			80.	The SBI requested the LEG, in line with its mandates, to continue assessing and to propose potential solutions for the challenges faced by many LDCs in relation to the formulation and implementation of NAPs.
			81.	The SBI also requested those LDCs that have formulated NAPs to submit them to the UNFCCC as soon as possible after completion.
			82.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to organizations for implementing activities to support the LDCs in undertaking adaptation, in particular the GEF for organizing the workshop for African francophone LDCs on simplifying access to climate finance for adaptation, and requested the LEG to contribute to such initiatives.
			83.	The SBI welcomed the continued collaboration of the LEG with the Adaptation Fund Board, GCF and GEF secretariats on enhancing access to funding for the LDCs for implementing NAPs under the NAP implementation pipeline development initiative and requested the LEG to continue that collaboration.
			84.	The SBI welcomed and encouraged the continued collaboration, on supporting the LDCs in undertaking adaptation and on other relevant work under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, of the LEG with the Adaptation Committee and other UNFCCC constituted bodies, partners of the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change and a wide range of organizations, agencies, and regional centres and networks.
			85.	The SBI requested the LEG to continue enhancing its provision of support to the LDCs for aligning NAPs and nationally determined contributions.
			86.	The SBI noted with appreciation the financial pledges, totalling USD 94 million, made by the Governments of Belgium, Germany, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Slovenia, Sweden and Switzerland between October 2022 and March 2023 to the LDCF, and urged additional contributions to the Fund.
			87.	The SBI invited Parties and relevant organizations to continue to provide resources for supporting implementation of the LEG work programme.
	XIV.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts*
(Agenda item 14)
		88.	The document considered at this session is available on the UNFCCC website. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBSTA 58 agenda item 6 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Lucas Di Pietro Paolo (Argentina) and Cornelia Jäger (Austria).
		89.	The SBI and the SBSTA initiated discussions on selecting the host of the secretariat of the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change and, at their 4th meeting, agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SB 59 taking into account the draft text prepared for this agenda item at this session.
	XV.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism of the Convention
(Agenda item 15)
		90.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Stefanos Minas (Greece) and Vositha Vedhani Wijenayake (Sri Lanka).
		91.	Having continued consideration of the progress of the Technology Executive Committee, the Climate Technology Centre and Network, the GEF and the GCF in strengthening linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism, at its 4th meeting the SBI recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 28 (November–December 2023).
	XVI.	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund
(Agenda item 16)
		92.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to the Chair’s proposal to defer consideration of these matters to SBI 59.
	XVII.	Second review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance
(Agenda item 17)
		1.	Proceedings
			93.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Gabriela Blatter (Switzerland) and Ali Waqas Malik (Pakistan). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			94.	The SBI initiated the second review of the functions of the SCF in accordance with the terms of reference contained in the annex to decision 15/CP.27 and affirmed by decision 15/CMA.4.
			95.	The SBI took note of the submissions from Parties and members of the SCF, the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network on the review and the views expressed by Parties on this matter at this session, including through in-session submissions.
			96.	The SBI acknowledged the important contribution of the SCF in assisting the COP and serving the Paris Agreement in exercising its functions, including throughout the areas of assessment for the second review as identified in the terms of reference contained in the annex to decision 15/CP.27 and affirmed by decision 15/CMA.4, and recognized the potential for improvements.
			97.	The SBI requested the secretariat, in preparing the technical paper on the second review in accordance with the terms of reference referred to in paragraph 94 above, to take into account the relevant deliberations and conclusions of SBI 58, including the submissions referred to in paragraph 95 above, and consider the following:
				(a)	Action taken by the SCF to address the outcomes of the first review of its functions;
				(b)	The transparency of the SCF decision-making process;
				(c)	The participation of SCF members and Party observers in SCF meetings and events, disaggregated by gender, geographical representation and Parties included or not included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(d)	How and to what extent the SCF has engaged with Party and non-Party observers and other constituted bodies at its meetings, Forums and outreach activities, including by assessing its working modalities;
				(e)	Geographical and gender balance among SCF members;
				(f)	The workload of the SCF, including the number of new mandates and the outputs delivered in response during the review period, and delivery requirements to produce the various outputs;
				(g)	The extent to which the outputs of the SCF fulfilled all of the core functions of the SCF and mandated activities outlined in relevant decisions and how the mandates received correspond to the core functions of the SCF;
				(h)	The effectiveness and timeliness of delivery of the four core functions of the SCF and its mandated activities outlined in relevant decisions;
				(i)	The quality and user-friendliness of SCF outputs;
				(j)	Gender-responsiveness in implementing its workplan.
			98.	The SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 59.
	XVIII.	Matters relating to capacity-building
(Agenda item 18)
		1.	Proceedings
			99.	The documents considered at this session are available on the UNFCCC website. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider these matters in informal consultations co‑facilitated by Catherine Goldberg and Gonzalo Guaiquil. At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			(a)	Matters relating to capacity-building under the Convention
			100.	The SBI welcomed the synthesis reports prepared by the secretariat on the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries established under decision 2/CP.7, and the capacity-building work of bodies established under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol.
			101.	The SBI acknowledged the progress in implementing the framework for capacity-building in developing countries under the Convention at the individual, institutional and systemic level.
			102.	The SBI reiterated that needs and gaps remain in addressing the priority issues identified in the framework for capacity-building in developing countries, particularly in addressing the capacity needs and gaps of the LDCs and small island developing States.
			103.	The SBI noted that further efforts are needed to address current and emerging capacity-building gaps and needs related to implementing the Paris Agreement in developing countries that are outside the current scope of the capacity-building framework under the Convention.
			104.	The SBI emphasized the importance of the capacity-building portal and the Durban Forum on capacity-building as means of effectively and continuously sharing information, good practices and lessons learned among a wide range of stakeholders under and outside the Convention.
			105.	The SBI noted with appreciation the outcomes of the 12th Durban Forum on capacity-building, held at this session, on opportunities and challenges in enhancing capacity for formulating and implementing NAPs.
			106.	The SBI recommended a draft decision on the terms of reference for the second review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building for consideration and adoption at COP 28. The SBI also recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration at COP 28 with a view to the COP recommending it for consideration and adoption at CMA 5.
				(b)	Matters relating to capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol
			107.	The SBI welcomed the synthesis reports prepared by the secretariat on the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries established under decision 2/CP.7, and reaffirmed in decision 29/CMP.1, and the capacity-building work of bodies established under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol.
			108.	The SBI reiterated that, while progress has been made in implementing the framework for capacity-building in developing countries under the Kyoto Protocol, needs and gaps remain in addressing the priority areas set out in paragraph 2 of decision 29/CMP.1.
			109.	The SBI emphasized the importance of the capacity-building portal and the Durban Forum on capacity-building as means of effectively and continuously sharing information, good practices and lessons learned among a wide range of stakeholders under and outside the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol.
			110.	The SBI noted with appreciation the outcomes of the 12th Durban Forum, held at this session, on opportunities and challenges in enhancing capacity for formulating and implementing NAPs.
	XIX.	Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings
(Agenda item 19)
		1.	Proceedings
			111.	The documents considered at this session are available on the UNFCCC website. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in a contact group chaired by the SBI Chair. At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			112.	The SBI took note of the document on arrangements for intergovernmental meetings prepared for this session.
				(a)	Preparations for the twenty-eighth session of the Conference of the Parties, the eighteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the fifth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
			113.	The SBI noted with appreciation the preparations by the Government of the United Arab Emirates for ensuring the success of the United Nations Climate Change Conference to be held there from 30 November to 12 December 2023, which will include COP 28, CMP 18, CMA 5 and SB 59.
			114.	The SBI noted that the Government of the United Arab Emirates will invite Heads of State and Government to attend the World Climate Action Summit to be held at the Conference from 1 to 2 December 2023.
			115.	The SBI invited the incoming Presidency of COP 28, CMP 18 and CMA 5, in consultation with the secretariat and the Bureau, to finalize the details of the arrangements for the Conference and to keep Parties informed thereof.
			116.	The SBI requested the secretariat to take note of the views of Parties on the possible elements of the provisional agendas for COP 28, CMP 18 and CMA 5.
			117.	The SBI emphasized the importance of openness, transparency, inclusiveness and adhering to established decision-making practice in making arrangements for the Conference.
			118.	The SBI welcomed the continued efforts of the COP 27 Presidency, the incoming COP 28 Presidency and the presiding officers of the subsidiary bodies to ensure efficiency, coordination, coherence, management and due process in the consideration of issues under discussion.
			119.	Reiterating the need to ensure efficient time management during the Conference, the SBI requested the presiding officers, with the support of the secretariat, to continue to enhance efforts in this regard, noting the improvements made at past sessions.
			120.	The SBI invited the secretariat to make arrangements for the delivery of concise national statements by ministers and other heads of delegation during the high-level segment of the Conference with a recommended time limit of three minutes, and statements by representatives of observer organizations with a recommended time limit of two minutes. The SBI encouraged Parties and observer organizations to keep within their respective time allocations.
				(b)	Hosts of future sessions
			121.	The SBI noted that, in keeping with the principle of rotation among the United Nations regional groups, the President of COP 29 (November 2024) would come from the Eastern European States. The SBI urged the Eastern European States to accelerate consultations within the group with a view to presenting an offer to host COP 29 as soon as possible and no later than at COP 28 in order to facilitate timely planning.
			122.	The SBI expressed its appreciation to the Government of Brazil for offering to host COP 30 (November 2025).
			123.	The SBI noted that, in keeping with the principle of rotation among the United Nations regional groups, the President of COP 31 (2026) would come from the Western European and other States. The SBI encouraged the Western European and other States to finalize their consultations and submit an offer to host COP 31 as soon as possible and no later than at SBI 62 (June 2025) in order to facilitate early planning.
			124.	The SBI reiterated that confirming the host country for a session of the COP as far in advance of the conference as possible minimizes logistical and financial risks and enables the secretariat to facilitate timely planning.
			125.	The SBI highlighted the importance of ensuring the full participation of Parties and the effective and meaningful participation of observer organizations in sessions of the governing and subsidiary bodies and mandated events. It encouraged the secretariat and hosts of future sessions of the governing and subsidiary bodies and mandated events to make logistical arrangements that will facilitate the inclusive and effective participation of Parties and observer organizations, including timely issuance of visas, where required, to all participants, availability of affordable accommodation, a safe and secure conference venue for all, and ease of access to the conference venue and the meeting rooms.
			126.	The SBI noted with concern the difficulties experienced by some delegates in obtaining visas to enable them to attend UNFCCC sessions and mandated events convened at the seat of the secretariat.
			127.	The SBI encouraged hosts of future sessions and mandated events to reaffirm their commitment to upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international human rights law before, during and after UNFCCC sessions and mandated events, and to ensure that participants can exercise those human rights without fear of intimidation and repercussions.
			128.	The SBI welcomed UNFCCC policies and the efforts of the secretariat to secure the conference venue and highlighted that all participants must abide by the Code of Conduct for UNFCCC events at the meeting premises and respect the national laws of the host country outside the meeting premises.
			129.	The SBI noted that for transparency the host country agreement for sessions of the COP should be made publicly available consistently with the Charter of the United Nations.
			130.	The SBI also noted that host country agreements should reflect the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations as well as respective obligations under international human rights law, and enable inclusive and effective participation of Parties and observer organizations, with a view to ensuring that UNFCCC sessions and mandated events are convened at a place where human rights and fundamental freedoms are promoted and protected, and where all participants are effectively protected against any violations or abuses, including harassment and sexual harassment.
			131.	The SBI recommended that the host country designate a focal point to address the issues referred to in paragraph 125 above.
				(c)	Calendar of future sessions
			132.	The SBI recommended the following dates for the sessional periods in 2026 for consideration and adoption at COP 28:
				(a)	First sessional period: Monday, 8 June, to Thursday, 18 June;
				(b)	Second sessional period: Monday, 9 November, to Friday, 20 November.
			133.	The SBI also recommended the following dates for the sessional periods in 2027 for consideration and adoption at COP 28:
				(a)	First sessional period: Monday, 7 June, to Thursday, 17 June;
				(b)	Second sessional period: Monday, 8 November, to Friday, 19 November.
				(d)	Increasing the efficiency of the UNFCCC process
			134.	The SBI noted a submission from a number of Parties and one observer organization on approaches to and initiatives for increasing the efficiency of the UNFCCC process towards enhancing ambition and strengthening implementation.
			135.	The SBI took note with appreciation of the information paper on past sessions and regional distribution of observer organizations prepared for this session.
			136.	The SBI noted the challenges posed by the increasing scale of the UNFCCC conferences, in particular the growing number of agenda items and mandated events since in-person sessions resumed at the end of 2021, following the postponement of sessions during the pandemic. It took note of the implications of this for the transparency, inclusiveness and effectiveness of the process and the implications for the budget and other organizational issues. It noted that improving efficiency is a Party-driven process and requires the collaboration of all actors in the spirit of confidence and trust, and in respect of agreed mandates and balance across agenda items.
			137.	The SBI took note of the preliminary exchange of views among Parties and observer organizations on opportunities for increasing the efficiency of the UNFCCC process, including, but not limited to, streamlining the provisional agendas of the governing and subsidiary bodies and encouraging the adoption of the rules of procedure by the COP. It noted that any steps taken in this respect should be an outcome of thorough discussion and agreement among Parties.
			138.	The SBI invited Parties and observer organizations to submit via the submission portal by 31 March 2024 views on streamlining the provisional agendas of the governing and subsidiary bodies.
			139.	The SBI requested the secretariat to prepare a technical paper for consideration at SBI 60 (June 2024) on options for reducing overlapping items on the provisional agendas of the governing and subsidiary bodies taking into account the views referred to in paragraph 138 above.
			140.	The SBI agreed to continue consideration of increasing the efficiency of the UNFCCC process towards enhancing ambition and strengthening implementation at SBI 60 taking into account the submissions and technical paper referred to in paragraphs 138 and 139 above respectively.
				(e)	Observer engagement
			141.	The SBI took note of the information on enhancing engagement of observer organizations in the UNFCCC intergovernmental process prepared for this session.
			142.	The SBI reaffirmed the value of substantive contributions from observer organizations for achieving ambitious outcomes in the intergovernmental process, as well as the value of their contributions to implementing the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement.
			143.	The SBI reiterated the urgent need for solutions to improve the representation of observer organizations from developing countries in the UNFCCC process and recalled its encouragement to future COP Presidencies to explore ways to increase the participation of observer organizations, including youth organizations and organizations from developing countries.
			144.	The SBI acknowledged the increasing number of admitted observer organizations and the associated challenges in meeting their diverse expectations of meaningful engagement and organizing UNFCCC conferences that can accommodate their increasing number and meet their diverse needs.
			145.	The SBI reaffirmed past conclusions on the importance of openness, transparency and inclusivity in the intergovernmental process and ways to enhance observer engagement. In this context, it encouraged presiding officers, Parties and the secretariat to continue implementing those conclusions and to uphold the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international human rights law and guarantee the integrity, dignity and safety of all observers at UNFCCC conferences.
			146.	In order to ensure open, inclusive and meaningful observer engagement, while fully preserving and respecting the Party-driven nature of the UNFCCC process, the SBI highlighted the following existing and additional practices and steps for engaging observers that could be considered, subject to the availability of resources and while increasing the participation of observer organizations from developing countries:
				(a)	Recommending current and incoming COP Presidencies to:
					(i)	Ensure open, inclusive and meaningful engagement of observer organizations in the lead-up to, during and after sessions of the COP in terms of both logistical arrangements and engagement opportunities;
					(ii)	Facilitate the engagement of a wide range of stakeholders with Parties during sessions of the COP, including by enabling them to express their views on substantive issues, while respecting the draft rules of procedure being applied and the Party-driven nature of the UNFCCC process;
					(iii)	Consider developing capacity-building initiatives for observer organizations, including for youth, in the lead-up to sessions;
				(b)	Encouraging all Parties to:
					(i)	Remain in plenary meetings to listen to all observer statements;
					(ii)	Consider including, as appropriate, civil society, in particular youth, in their national delegations;
					(iii)	Enhance engagement with a broad range of stakeholders, in particular youth, on climate action at the national level;
				(c)	Requesting the secretariat to:
					(i)	Ensure that the standard wording of calls for submissions of information and views refers to Parties and observer organizations;
					(ii)	Explore how to enhance the participation of observers from developing countries in sessions in the light of paragraph 143 above;
					(iii)	Prepare a technical paper on options for increasing the participation of observer organizations from developing countries, including, but not limited to, providing financial support.
			147.	The SBI took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 139 and 146(c) above.
			148.	It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	XX.	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
(Agenda item 20)
		A.	Budgetary matters
(Agenda sub-item 20(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				149.	The documents considered at this session are available on the UNFCCC website. At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in a contact group co-chaired by Georg Børsting (Norway) and Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago). At its 4th meeting, the SBI considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				150.	The SBI took note of the information contained in the documents on administrative, financial and institutional matters.
				151.	The SBI recommended that COP 28 approve a core programme budget of EUR 74,105,511 for the biennium 2024–2025.
				152.	The SBI authorized the Executive Secretary to notify Parties of their 2024 contributions on the basis of the budget amount shown in paragraph 151 above after taking into account the special annual contribution from the Host Government of EUR 766,938.
				153.	The SBI recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 28 and two draft decisions on this matter for consideration and adoption at CMP 18.
				154.	The SBI requested the secretariat to prepare a document that contains its applied policy and criteria for engagement and collaboration with non-Party stakeholders, as well as safeguards to avoid any reputational or other risks, and to make it available at least 60 days before the start of SBI 59.
				155.	The SBI noted with concern the inadequacy of the budget for the biennium 2022–‍2023 to support all mandates from Parties and the increased reliance on supplementary funding.
		B.	Continuous review of the functions and operations of the secretariat
(Agenda sub-item 20(b))
			156.	At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited the secretariat to make a statement and the SBI took note of the information provided.
		C.	Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 20(c))
			157.	At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited a representative of the Host Government of the secretariat to provide the SBI with a brief report on the matter and a representative of the secretariat to make a statement. The SBI took note of the progress on this matter and agreed to consider it again at SBI 62.
		D.	UNFCCC annual report
(Agenda sub-item 20(d))
			158.	The document considered at this session is available on the UNFCCC website. At the 1st meeting, the SBI Chair invited a representative of the secretariat to make a statement, and the SBI took note of the UNFCCC annual report for 2022.
	XXI.	National adaptation plans
(Agenda item 21)
		159.	At its 1st meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Antwi-Boasiako Amoah (Ghana) and Jens Fugl.
		160.	The SBI considered information on progress, challenges, gaps and needs in relation to the formulation and implementation of NAPs and related information provided by the Adaptation Committee and the LEG at this session. At its 4th meeting, the SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 59, including on the basis of the draft text elements prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda item at this session.
	XXII.	Other matters
(Agenda item 22)
		161.	The SBI considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. No other matters were raised.
	XXIII.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 23)
		1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
			162.	At the 4th meeting, a representative of the secretariat informed the SBI that several activities resulting from the conclusions adopted at this session require additional resources over and above the core budget for the biennium 2022–2023 and the agreed budget for the biennium 2024–2025. Relevant requests for activities are contained in conclusions adopted under various SBI, including joint SBI–SBSTA, agenda items.
			163.	Under joint SBI agenda item 8 and SBSTA item 9, “Work programme on just transition pathways referred to in the relevant paragraphs of decision 1/CMA.4”, supplementary funding in the amount of EUR 84,750 will be required in 2023 to hold a workshop and prepare synthesis and summary reports before SB 59. These are temporary or short-term activities and would be funded from voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities.
			164.	Under agenda item 15, “Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism of the Convention”, supplementary funding in the amount of EUR 55,000 will be required in 2023–2024 to prepare a synthesis report and organize an in-session workshop.
			165.	Under agenda item 19, “Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings”, supplementary funding in the amount of EUR 136,000 will be required in 2023–2024 to prepare technical papers on options for reducing overlapping items on the provisional agendas and on options for increasing the participation of observer organizations from developing countries in the UNFCCC process.
			166.	The representative of the secretariat noted that the amounts presented are preliminary and based on information available at the time. She also noted that the secretariat is counting on the continued generosity of Parties to provide supplementary funding for these activities in a timely and predictable manner, as without such contributions it will be a challenge for the secretariat to provide the requested support.
			167.	The representative concluded by noting that costs for 2026 and beyond will be reviewed in the context of preparing the budget for the biennium 2026–2027.
		2.	Closure of and report on the session
			168.	At the 4th meeting of the SBI, which was held together with the 4th meeting of SBSTA 58, statements were made by representatives of 25 Parties, including 14 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; Coalition for Rainforest Nations; Environmental Integrity Group; European Union and its member States; Group of 77 and China; Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; LDCs; Like-minded Developing Countries; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of eight UNFCCC constituencies: business and industry NGOs; children and youth NGOs; environmental NGOs; Indigenous Peoples organizations; local government and municipal authorities; research and independent NGOs; trade union NGOs; and women and gender constituency.
			169.	The SBI considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report thereon and make it available to Parties.
			170.	At the same meeting, the SBI Chair thanked Parties for the flexibility and spirit of compromise shown throughout the session and commended delegates for their collective efforts to successfully resolve certain issues, leading to agreement on a robust set of conclusions and draft decisions. He highlighted the importance of rebuilding trust and continuing work in the lead-up to COP 28. The Chair then closed the session.
		
			
