|  | United Nations | FCCC/CP/2014/10/Add.2 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 2 February 2015  Original: English |

Conference of the Parties
Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twentieth session, held in Lima from 1 to 14 December 2014
	Addendum
Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties at its twentieth session
	Contents
Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties
	Decision	Page
	2/CP.20	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated 
with Climate Change Impacts		2
	3/CP.20	National adaptation plans		4
	4/CP.20	Report of the Adaptation Committee		6
	5/CP.20	Long-term climate finance		9
	6/CP.20	Report of the Standing Committee on Finance		11
		7/CP.20	Report of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties and 
guidance to the Green Climate Fund		14
		8/CP.20	Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties and 
guidance to the Global Environment Facility		18
	9/CP.20	Fifth review of the Financial Mechanism		20
	10/CP.20	Further guidance to the Least Developed Countries Fund		35
		11/CP.20	Methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties included 
in Annex I to the Convention		37
	12/CP.20	Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change		39
Decision 2/CP.20
Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Reaffirming the provisions contained in decisions 3/CP.18 and 2/CP.19,
	Appreciating the work of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts to develop its initial two-year workplan,
	Taking note of the report of the Executive Committee,
	1.	Approves the initial two-year workplan of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts;
	2.	Notes the useful inputs provided by Parties, observers and other organizations as part of the transparent, inclusive and participatory process of developing the initial two-year workplan of the Executive Committee;
	3.	Reaffirms the establishment of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts, under the guidance of, and accountable to, the Conference of the Parties, to guide the implementation of the functions of the Warsaw International Mechanism referred to in decision 2/CP.19, paragraph 5;
	4.	Also reaffirms the request to the Executive Committee to report annually to the Conference of the Parties through the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation and make recommendations, as appropriate;
	5.	Decides that the Executive Committee shall be composed of the following, taking into account the goal of gender balance pursuant to decision 23/CP.18:
	(a)	Ten members from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties);
	(b)	Ten members from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties), comprising two members each from the African, Asia-Pacific, and the Latin American and Caribbean States, one member from small island developing States, one member from least developed country Parties, and two additional members from non-Annex I Parties;
	6.	Encourages Parties to nominate to the Executive Committee experts with the diversity of experience and knowledge relevant to loss and damage associated with climate change impacts;
	7.	Decides that members shall serve for a term of two years and shall be eligible to serve a maximum of two consecutive terms of office, and that the following rules shall apply:
	(a)	Half of the members shall be elected initially for a term of three years and half of the members shall be elected for a term of two years;
	(b)	Thereafter, the Conference of the Parties shall elect members for a term of two years;
	(c)	The members shall remain in office until their successors have been elected;
	8.	Also decides that the Executive Committee may establish expert groups, subcommittees, panels, thematic advisory groups or task-focused ad hoc working groups to help execute the work of the Executive Committee in guiding the implementation of the Warsaw International Mechanism, as appropriate, in an advisory role, and that report to the Executive Committee;
	9.	Further decides that decisions of the Executive Committee shall be taken by consensus;
	10.	Decides that the Executive Committee shall elect annually Co-Chairs from among its members to serve for a term of one year, with one being a member from an Annex I Party and the other being a member from a non-Annex I Party;
	11.	Also decides on other related provisions including:
	(a)	If one or both Co-Chairs are absent from a particular meeting, any other member designated by the Executive Committee shall temporarily serve as the Co-Chair or Chair of that meeting;
	(b)	If a Co-Chair is unable to complete the term of office, the Executive Committee shall elect a replacement to complete that term of office;
	12.	Further decides that the Executive Committee shall meet at least twice per year, while retaining its flexibility to adjust the number of meetings, as appropriate;
	13.	Decides that the Executive Committee shall convene its first meeting as soon as practical following the election of its members commencing at the twentieth session of the Conference of the Parties but no later than March 2015, and at its first meeting shall adopt its rules of procedure and begin implementing its workplan;
	14.	Also decides that the meetings of the Executive Committee shall be open to attendance by admitted observer organizations, except where otherwise decided by the Executive Committee, with a view to encouraging a balanced regional representation of observers;
	15.	Further decides that the decisions and outputs of the Executive Committee shall be made publicly available on the UNFCCC website unless decided otherwise by the Executive Committee;
	16.	Decides that English shall be the working language of the Executive Committee;
	17.	Also decides that the secretariat shall support and facilitate the work of the Executive Committee, subject to the availability of resources.
	10th plenary meeting
	13 December 2014
	1.	
Decision 3/CP.20
National adaptation plans
	The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling decisions 1/CP.16, 5/CP.17, 12/CP.18 and 18/CP.19,
	1.	Decides that a revision of the initial guidelines for the formulation of national adaptation plans is not necessary at this time;
	2.	Recognizes that the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans is fundamental for building adaptive capacity and reducing vulnerability to the impacts of climate change;
	3.	Reiterates that the national adaptation plan process is a country-driven, gender-sensitive, participatory and fully transparent approach, taking into consideration vulnerable groups, communities and ecosystems, and should be based on and guided by the best available science and, as appropriate, traditional and indigenous knowledge, with a view to integrating adaptation into relevant social, economic and environmental policies and actions, where appropriate;
	4.	Recognizes the continuous, iterative and long-term nature of the national adaptation plan process, and that the national adaptation plans can serve as an important tool for ensuring a common understanding and for communicating progress made towards both reducing vulnerability and integrating climate change adaptation into national and development planning;
	5.	Acknowledges the importance of communicating, in a flexible manner, what the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans involves, as well as the outputs and outcomes of that process;
	6.	Decides that there is a need to enhance the reporting on the process to formulate and implement the national adaptation plans;
	7.	Notes that there is a need to strengthen the existing reporting related to the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans under the Convention;
	8.	Decides to explore options for enhancing reporting related to the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans as a part of the workshop referred to in document FCCC/SBI/2014/8, paragraph 106, and the review to monitor and evaluate progress made on the national adaptation plan process referred to in decision 5/CP.17, paragraph 37;
	9.	Invites least developed country Parties and other interested developing country Parties that are not least developed countries that may wish to do so to forward outputs, including national adaptation plan documents, and outcomes related to the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans, to the NAP Central;
	10.	Decides to further consider how to enhance reporting related to the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans at the forty-second session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (June 2015);
		11.	Requests the Adaptation Committee and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group, in collaboration with the Green Climate Fund, as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism, to consider how to best support developing country Parties in accessing funding from the Green Climate Fund for the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans, and to report thereon to the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its forty-second session.
	10th plenary meeting
	12 December 2014
	2.	
Decision 4/CP.20
Report of the Adaptation Committee
	The Conference of the Parties,
	1.	Welcomes the report of the Adaptation Committee;
	2.	Also welcomes the progress made by the Adaptation Committee in the implementation of its three-year workplan, including:
		(a)	Promoting coherence in adaptation under the Convention, in particular in collaboration with the Least Developed Countries Expert Group, the Technology Executive Committee and the Standing Committee on Finance and in the context of the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change;
		(b)	Engaging relevant institutions, organizations, frameworks, networks and centres;
		(c)	Conducting a joint meeting with the Nairobi work programme on available tools for the use of indigenous and traditional knowledge and practices for adaptation, needs of local and indigenous communities, and the application of gender-sensitive approaches and tools for adaptation;
		(d)	Conducting a special in-session event on promoting synergy and strengthening engagement with national, regional and international organizations, centres and networks;
		(e)	Conducting an in-session meeting of the Adaptation Committee organized in collaboration with Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Working Group II;
		(f)	Publishing its 2014 thematic report on institutional arrangements for national adaptation planning and implementation;
	3.	Notes with appreciation the continued work of the Adaptation Committee on providing technical support and guidance to the Parties on adaptation action, including through the work carried out by the task force on national adaptation plans of the Committee;
	4.	Requests Parties, operating entities of the Financial Mechanism and other relevant entities working on adaptation to consider the recommendations contained in chapter V of the report of the Adaptation Committee, as included in the annex;
	5.	Reiterates its encouragement made in decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 103, for Parties to nominate experts to the Adaptation Committee with a diversity of experience and knowledge relevant to adaptation to climate change, while also taking into account the need to achieve gender balance in accordance with decision 36/CP.7;
	6.	Welcomes the initiation of consideration by the Adaptation Committee of its next workplan, starting in 2016.
Annex
	Recommendations for the Conference of the Parties
		1.	The Adaptation Committee (AC) agreed to include the following recommendations in its report for consideration by the Conference of the Parties (COP) at its twentieth session.
		2.	The AC recommends that the COP invite Parties, operating entities of the Financial Mechanism and relevant entities working on adaptation to take into account the following recommendations, which are based on the outcomes of the meeting of the task force on national adaptation plans (NAPs) referred to in paragraphs 38 and 39 of the report of the AC referred to in paragraph 1 above:
			(a)	Recognizing the importance of raising awareness and buy-in for the NAP process by all stakeholders, in order to:
				(i)	Generate interest in, demand for and leadership of the NAP process at the national level;
				(ii)	Make available support for the NAP process better known;
			(b)	Improving coordination, collaboration and coherence among:
				(i)	Bilateral and multilateral agencies and institutions, including the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism;
				(ii)	Various national ministries;
				(iii)	Parties and regions, with a view to:
				a.	Enhancing the accessibility of NAP support;
					b.	Further understanding effective pathways to achieving the objectives of the NAP process, on the basis of experience;
					c.	Fostering coherence in the provision of support, including by better matching needs with support, involving more financial institutions in the NAP process and helping countries to prepare for accessing funding, including from the Green Climate Fund (GCF);
			(c)	Enhancing learning as stakeholders increasingly engage in the NAP process, particularly around aspects such as the role of institutional arrangements and monitoring and evaluation.
		3.	In supporting the monitoring and evaluation of adaptation, the AC recommends that the COP invite Parties, operating entities of the Financial Mechanism and relevant entities working on adaptation to take into account the following recommendations:
			(a)	Monitoring and evaluation frameworks need to be appropriate, relevant to needs and tailored to country circumstances. A common set of global indicators is not useful, owing to the context-specific nature of adaptation;
			(b)	National-level assessments can play a different role in measuring adaptive capacity from subnational or project-based assessments. National-level assessments could, for example, measure the degree of coordination and integration of adaptation in national priorities;
			(c)	A positive learning environment, which encourages formal and informal learning, including peer-to-peer learning, and which encourages learning from negative as well as positive experiences, is important;
			(d)	Planning and allocation of resources, both technical and financial, are key for effective monitoring and evaluation systems.
		4.	In the context of the monitoring and evaluation of adaptation, the AC also recommends that the COP invite the Board of the GCF, with respect to its Results Management Framework, to consider:
			(a)	Keeping indicators simple;
			(b)	Designing indicators that are qualitative as well as quantitative;
			(c)	Designing indicators in such a way as to capture the progress that countries are able to make in integrating adaptation into their development and sectoral planning, policies and actions;
			(d)	Giving countries sufficient flexibility to define their indicators in line with their national and local planning, strategies and priorities.
		5.	Furthermore, the AC agreed to forward the following recommendations resulting from the workshop on best practices and needs of local and indigenous communities referred to in paragraph 45 of its report referred to in paragraph 1 above for consideration by the COP. The COP may wish to:
			(a)	Invite Parties to underline the importance of indigenous and traditional knowledge and practices, in a manner commensurate with modern science, for the effective planning and implementation of adaptation, including by encouraging the integration of indigenous, traditional and local knowledge into the NAP process;
			(b)	Encourage the Adaptation Fund, the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the GCF to enhance their consideration of local, indigenous and traditional knowledge and practices and their integration into adaptation planning and practices, as well as procedures for monitoring, evaluation and reporting.
		6.	Regarding the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, the AC recommends the following actions for consideration by the COP:
			(a)	Inviting the Board of the GCF to consider the significant work undertaken under the Cancun Adaptation Framework and on the NAP process as it continues to provide the governance of the Fund;
			(b)	Inviting the Board of the GCF to engage with institutions that have started initiatives on countries’ readiness to access GCF funding and exploring how more countries can benefit from such initiatives;
			(c)	Inviting the GEF, in supporting the NAP process and when implementing its new programming strategy on adaptation for the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund for the period 2014–2018, to consider the findings arising from the meeting of the NAP task force referred to in paragraph 84 and the initial conclusions of the AC on the monitoring and evaluation of adaptation referred to in paragraph 85 of the report of the AC referred to in paragraph 1 above.
			10th plenary meeting
			12 December 2014
			3.	
Decision 5/CP.20
Long-term climate finance
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling Articles 4 and 11 of the Convention,
	Also recalling decision 1/CP.16, paragraphs 2, 4 and 97–101, as well as decisions 1/CP.17, 2/CP.17, paragraphs 126–132, and decisions 4/CP.18 and 3/CP.19,
	1.	Welcomes with appreciation the pledges to the Green Climate Fund and to the sixth replenishment of the Global Environment Facility, and contributions to the Least Developed Countries Fund, the Special Climate Change Fund, and the Adaptation Fund;
	2.	Takes note of the in-session workshop on long-term climate finance held in 2014 and the summary report prepared by the secretariat thereon;
	3.	Welcomes the biennial submissions received to date from developed country Parties on updated strategies and approaches for scaling up climate finance from 2014 to 2020 as contained in decision 3/CP.19, paragraph 10, and urges those developed country Parties that have not yet done so to do so;
	4.	Also welcomes the first biennial high-level ministerial dialogue on climate finance convened in accordance with decision 3/CP.19, and looks forward to the summary of the presidency of the Conference of the Parties on the deliberations of this dialogue;
	5.	Notes with appreciation the 2014 Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows Report;
	6.	Takes note of decision 11/CP.20 on methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, and decision 6/CP.20 on the report of the Standing Committee on Finance;
	7.	Calls on developed country Parties to channel a substantial share of public climate funds to adaptation activities;
	8.	Requests Parties to continue to enhance their enabling environments and policy frameworks to facilitate the mobilization and effective deployment of climate finance, in accordance with decision 3/CP.19;
	9.	Recognizes that developed country Parties commit, in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation, to a goal of mobilizing jointly USD 100 billion per year by 2020 to address the needs of developing countries;
	10.	Requests developed country Parties, in preparing their next round of updated biennial submissions on strategies and approaches for scaling up climate finance for the period 2016–2020, to enhance the available quantitative and qualitative elements of a pathway, placing greater emphasis on transparency and predictability of financial flows, as per decision 3/CP.19, paragraph 10;
	11.	Also requests the secretariat to prepare a compilation and synthesis of the biennial submissions on the strategies and approaches, to inform the in-session workshops;
	12.	Further requests the secretariat to organize annual in-session workshops through to 2020 and to prepare a summary report of the workshops for annual consideration by the Conference of the Parties and the high-level ministerial dialogue on climate finance;
	13.	Decides that the in-session workshops referred in paragraph 12 above will, in 2015 and 2016, focus on the issues of adaptation finance, needs for support to developing country Parties and cooperation on enhanced enabling environments and support for readiness activities in accordance with decision 3/CP.19, paragraph 12;
		14.	Invites the thematic bodies under the Convention, in particular the Standing Committee on Finance, the Adaptation Committee and the Technology Executive Committee, where appropriate, to consider the long-term finance issues referred in decision 3/CP.19, paragraph 12, when implementing their 2015–2016 workplans, as an input to the in-session workshops referred to in paragraph 12 above.
	10th plenary meeting
	13 December 2014
	
Decision 6/CP.20
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling Articles 4 and 11 of the Convention,
	Also recalling decisions 1/CP.16, paragraph 112, and 2/CP.17, paragraphs 120 and 121, as well as decisions 5/CP.18 and 7/CP.19,
	4.	Welcomes, and notes with appreciation, the report of the Standing Committee on Finance;
	5.	Also welcomes the transparency and openness with which the Standing Committee on Finance conducts its work;
	6.	Endorses the workplan of the Standing Committee on Finance for 2015;
	7.	Expresses its appreciation for the financial contributions provided by the Governments of Belgium, Japan, Norway and Switzerland and the European Union in order to support the implementation of the work programme of the Standing Committee on Finance, and recalls decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 124;
	8.	Invites the Standing Committee on Finance to further strengthen its engagement with all relevant stakeholders and bodies of the Convention;
	9.	Welcomes the progress achieved by the Standing Committee on Finance through the successful completion of the 2014 biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows covering the period 2010–2012;
	10.	Notes with appreciation the 2014 Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows Report;
	11.	Invites the relevant bodies under the Convention to take note of the summary and recommendations by the Standing Committee on Finance on the 2014 biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows;
	12.	Requests relevant technical bodies to consider the recommendations contained in the report on the 2014 biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows as part of their ongoing deliberations related to climate finance;
	13.	Also requests the Standing Committee on Finance, as part of its ongoing work on measurement, reporting and verification of support, and with a view to recommending improvements to the methodologies for reporting financial information, to consider the findings and recommendations of the biennial assessment in its annual report to the Conference of the Parties for its consideration at its twenty-first session (November–December 2015);
	14.	Further requests the Standing Committee on Finance, in the context of its ongoing work, including the preparation of the biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows, to further explore how it can enhance its work on the measurement, reporting and verification of support, based on the best available information on the mobilization of various resources, including private and alternative resources, through public interventions;
	15.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to include, in its report to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session, information on progress made in the implementation of its 2015 workplan, taking into account paragraphs 4–7 of decision 11/CP.20 on methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
	16.	Welcomes the 2014 Standing Committee on Finance forum on the mobilization of adaptation finance;
	17.	Takes note of the report of the 2014 Standing Committee on Finance forum;
	18.	Notes with appreciation the progress of the work by the Standing Committee on Finance on the issue of financing for forests, taking into account different policy approaches;
	19.	Looks forward to the third forum of the Standing Committee on Finance, taking place in 2015, which will focus on issues related to finance for forests;
	20.	Encourages the Standing Committee on Finance to continue to engage with all relevant actors working on forests in the preparation of the forum, with a view to ensuring broad participation;
	21.	Invites the Standing Committee on Finance to consider, in the context of its forum on issues related to finance for forests, inter alia, decisions relevant to activities referred to in decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 70, including decisions 1/CP.16, 2/CP.17 and 12/CP.17 as well as decisions 9/CP.19 to 15/CP.19;
	22.	Endorses the recommendations on the provision of guidance to the operating entities provided in paragraph 10 of the report of the Standing Committee on Finance to the Conference of the Parties;
	23.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to provide advice on the issue of the frequency of guidance to the Financial Mechanism and to report back to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session;
	24.	Welcomes the inputs of the Technology Executive Committee and the Adaptation Committee to the work of the Standing Committee on Finance for its consideration in preparing elements of draft guidance to the operating entities;
	25.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to consider issues related to possible future institutional linkages and relations between the Adaptation Fund and other institutions under the Convention;
	26.	Decides, in accordance with decision 2/CP.17, annex VI, paragraph 10, to conduct the review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance no later than at the twenty-third session of the Conference of the Parties (November 2017);
	27.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to consider the guidance provided to the Standing Committee on Finance in other decisions of the Conference of the Parties.
		10th plenary meeting
		28.	13 December 2014
Decision 7/CP.20
Report of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties and guidance to the Green Climate Fund
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling Articles 4 and 11 of the Convention,
	Taking into account decision 11/CP.1,
	Recalling decisions 1/CP.16, 3/CP.17, 1/CP.18, 6/CP.18, 7/CP.18, 4/CP.19 and 5/CP.19,
	1.	Welcomes the report of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties, in particular the detailed and comprehensive list of responses of the Green Climate Fund Board to guidance received from the Conference of the Parties;
	2.	Notes with appreciation the progress made by the Green Climate Fund, and the information contained thereon in the report of the Green Climate Fund, in particular the decision on the confirmation of the completion of the essential requirements and the commencement of the initial resource mobilization process;
	3.	Welcomes with appreciation the successful and timely initial resource mobilization process of the Green Climate Fund that led to the mobilization of USD 10.2 billion to date by contributing Parties, enabling the Green Climate Fund to start its activities in supporting developing country Parties of the Convention, and making it the largest dedicated climate fund;
	4.	Requests the Green Climate Fund to ensure that the ongoing resource mobilization efforts are commensurate with the ambitions of the Fund, and calls for contributions by other developed country Parties, as well as invites financial inputs from a variety of other sources, public and private, including alternative sources, throughout the initial resource mobilization process;
	5.	Urges the Green Climate Fund, the Interim Trustee, and contributors to confirm the pledges in the form of fully executed contribution agreements/arrangements, taking note that the commitment authority of the Green Climate Fund will become effective when 50 per cent of the contributions pledged by the November 2014 pledging session are reflected in fully executed contribution agreements/arrangements received by the secretariat no later than 30 April 2015 as provided for in Green Climate Fund Board decision B.08/13, annex XIX, paragraph 1(c);
	6.	Notes Green Climate Fund Board decisions, including the decisions made at its 8th meeting, regarding the formal replenishment process for the Fund;
	7.	Welcomes Green Climate Fund Board decision B.08/07 to start taking decisions on the approval of projects and programmes no later than its 3rd meeting in 2015;
	8.	Requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to accelerate the operationalization of the adaptation and mitigation windows, and to ensure adequate resources for capacity-building and technology development and transfer, consistent with paragraph 38 of the Governing Instrument;
	9.	Also requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to accelerate the operationalization of the private sector facility by aiming to ensure that private sector entities and public entities with relevant experience in working with the private sector are accredited in 2015, expediting action to engage local private sector actors in developing country Parties, including small- and medium-sized enterprises in the least developed countries, small island developing States and African States, emphasizing a country-driven approach, expediting action to mobilize resources at scale, and developing a strategic approach to engaging with the private sector;
	10.	Further requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund, in the implementation of its 2015 workplan, to complete its work related to policies and procedures to accept financial inputs from non-public and alternative sources, the investment and risk management frameworks of the Green Climate Fund, the impact analysis on its initial results areas, including options for determining Board level investment portfolios across the structure of the Fund, and the approval process of the Fund, including methodologies for selecting programmes and projects that best achieve the objectives of the Fund;
	11.	Requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to consider ways by which to further increase the transparency of its proceedings;
	12.	Also requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to accelerate the implementation of its work programme on readiness and preparatory support, ensuring that adequate resources are provided for its execution, including from the initial resource mobilization process, providing urgent support to developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, small island developing States and African States, led by their national designated authorities or focal points to build institutional capacities in accordance with Green Climate Fund Board decision B.08/11;
	13.	Encourages the timely implementation of the accreditation framework and requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund, in its implementation, to pay adequate attention to the priorities and needs of developing country Parties, including the least developed countries, small island developing States and African States, emphasizing the need to provide readiness support to those national and regional entities eligible for fast tracking that request it;
	14.	Invites developing country Parties to expedite the nomination of their national designated authorities and focal points as soon as possible, as well as the selection of their national and subnational implementing entities, to facilitate their engagement with the Green Climate Fund;
	15.	Requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund, when deciding its policies and programme priorities, to consider the information and lessons learned through engagement with other relevant bodies under the Convention, and other relevant international institutions;
	16.	Also requests the Green Climate Fund to enhance its collaboration with existing funds under the Convention and other climate relevant funds in order to enhance the complementarity and coherence of policies and programming at the national level;
	17.	Further requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to further enhance the participation of all stakeholders in accordance with paragraph 71 of the Governing Instrument and other relevant Board decisions;
	18.	Requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund:
	(a)	To develop a monitoring and accountability framework in accordance with Green Climate Fund Board decision B.08/02;
	(b)	To consider decisions relevant to REDD-plus, including decisions 1/CP.16, 2/CP.17, 12/CP.17 and decisions 9/CP.19, 10/CP.19, 11/CP.19, 12/CP.19, 13/CP.19, 14/CP.19 and 15/CP.19;
	19.	Urges the Green Climate Fund to ensure that staff selection is open, transparent and based on merit without discrimination, taking into account geographical and gender balance, in accordance with the administrative policies of the Green Climate Fund;
	20.	Takes note of Green Climate Fund Board decision B.08/24 on the institutional linkage between the United Nations and the Green Climate Fund, and requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to continue further deliberations on privileges and immunities, and to report on this matter to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session (November–December 2015);
	21.	Urges developing country Parties to enter into bilateral agreements with the Green Climate Fund based on the template to be approved by the Board of the Green Climate Fund, in order to provide privileges and immunities for the Fund, in accordance with Green Climate Fund Board decision B.08/24, paragraph (b);
	22.	Requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to report biennially to the Conference of the Parties on the status of existing privileges and immunities with regard to its operational activities, starting at the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties;
	23.	Also requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to make available its annual report in a timely manner and no later than 12 weeks prior to a session of the Conference of the Parties in accordance with decision 6/CP.18, paragraph 15, for due consideration by Parties;
	24.	Further requests the Green Climate Fund to include in its annual report to the Conference of the Parties the recommendations of its independent redress mechanism, if any, and any actions taken by the Board in response to those recommendations;
	25.	Requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to report to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session on progress made in the implementation of this decision, as well as the elements and provisions of the guidance contained in decisions 3/CP.17, 6/CP.18, 4/CP.19 and 5/CP.19;
	26.	Invites Parties to submit to the secretariat annually, and no later than 10 weeks prior to the subsequent session of the Conference of the Parties, their views and recommendations in writing on the elements to be taken into account in developing guidance to the Green Climate Fund;
		27.	Requests the secretariat to compile the submissions referred to in paragraph 26 above into a miscellaneous document for consideration by Parties in developing guidance through the Standing Committee on Finance to the Green Climate Fund.
	10th plenary meeting
	29.	13 December 2014
Decision 8/CP.20
Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties and guidance to the Global Environment Facility
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decisions 12/CP.2, 3/CP.16, 5/CP.16, 7/CP.16, 11/CP.17, 9/CP.18 and 6/CP.19,
	Taking note with appreciation of the annual report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties,
	Taking note of the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Finance contained in its report to the Conference of the Parties with regard to the provision of draft guidance to the Global Environment Facility,
		1.	Welcomes with appreciation the sixth replenishment of the Global Environment Facility (July 2014 to June 2018), while urging countries that have not fulfilled their pledges for the fifth replenishment of the Global Environment Facility to do so as soon as possible;
		2.	Notes that the amount of funding available for the climate change focal area was reduced in the sixth replenishment period of the Global Environment Facility and that the country allocation of some countries, including some least developed countries, small island developing States, and African States has decreased as a consequence, while highlighting that funding for climate change related interventions at the Global Environment Facility has continued to increase with pilot integrated approaches;
		3.	Welcomes the pledges and contributions made to the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund, and calls for continued support to these funds;
		4.	Notes the actions being taken by the Global Environment Facility to expedite its project cycle;
		5.	Encourages the Global Environment Facility to continue to cooperate with all its implementing and project agencies as well as recipient countries in order to improve its project cycle, taking into account the report of the fifth overall performance study of the Global Environment Facility and the recommendations contained therein;
		6.	Also encourages the Global Environment Facility to continue to increase the overall transparency and openness of its operations, particularly with regard to the disclosure of information on the status of the implementation of projects and programmes, the project-level accountability of its implementing agencies and with respect to the timely disbursement of funds, as well as the advice provided to countries on co-financing;
		7.	Welcomes the gender mainstreaming policy of the Global Environment Facility;
		8.	Requests the Global Environment Facility to ensure that gender mainstreaming is implemented both within its portfolio and within its structure;
		9.	Takes note of the policy on co-financing of the Global Environment Facility and the concerns regarding the implementation of this policy as raised by some Parties;
		10.	Encourages the Global Environment Facility to improve the communication of its co-financing policy so that it is better understood and appropriately applied by accredited project agencies and the implementing agencies of the Global Environment Facility, while acknowledging the potential impacts of this policy on developing country Parties, in particular the least developed countries, small island developing States, and African States;
		11.	Also encourages the Global Environment Facility to finalize the accreditation of project agencies and to share, in its next report to the Conference of the Parties, lessons learned and progress made in its pilot accreditation of project agencies, particularly in the least developed countries, small island developing States and African States;
		12.	Requests the Global Environment Facility to continue to work with its implementing agencies to further simplify its procedures and improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the process through which Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention receive funding to meet their obligations under Article 12, paragraph 1, of the Convention;
		13.	Invites Parties to submit to the secretariat annually, in writing, and no later than 10 weeks prior to the subsequent session of the Conference of the Parties, their views and recommendations on the elements to be taken into account in developing guidance to the Global Environment Facility;
		14.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to take into consideration the submissions referred to in paragraph 13 above when providing draft guidance to the Global Environment Facility for consideration by the Conference of the Parties;
		15.	Also requests the Global Environment Facility to include, in its annual report to the Conference of the Parties, information on the steps that it has taken to implement the guidance provided in this decision.
	10th plenary meeting
	30.	13 December 2014
Decision 9/CP.20
Fifth review of the Financial Mechanism
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decisions 3/CP.4, 2.CP.12, 1/CP.16, 2/CP.16 and 8/CP.19,
	Welcoming the progress made by the Board of the Green Climate Fund in operationalizing the Green Climate Fund,
	Noting that the fifth review of the Financial Mechanism focused on the Global Environment Facility owing to the fact that the Green Climate Fund is still developing its operations and that therefore it was premature to review many aspects of the Green Climate Fund,
		1.	Welcomes with appreciation the expert input to the fifth review of the Financial Mechanism provided by the Standing Committee on Finance, contained in the technical paper referred to in paragraph 3 below;
		2.	Encourages the Standing Committee on Finance to build on the same methodology and criteria in future reviews of the Financial Mechanism;
		3.	Acknowledges the executive summary of the technical paper on the fifth review, as contained in the annex, including the conclusions and recommendations made by the Standing Committee on Finance;
		4.	Encourages the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism to address, as appropriate, these recommendations in their future work, particularly with regard to the complementarity between the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism;
		5.	Recognizes the general positive assessment of the performance of the Global Environment Facility;
		6.	Notes, however, that the least developed countries and small island developing States still experience challenges in accessing the resources from the Global Environment Facility;
		7.	Decides to consider the timing of guidance provided by the Conference of the Parties to the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, especially that guidance which has resource implications vis-à-vis the replenishment cycles of the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, in order to ensure that key guidance is fully considered in the programming strategies and policy recommendations associated with each replenishment period of the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism;
		8.	Also decides to initiate the sixth review of the Financial Mechanism at its twenty-second session (November 2016), in accordance with the criteria contained in the guidelines annexed to decision 8/CP.19, or as these guidelines may be subsequently amended;
		9.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to provide expert input to the sixth review of the Financial Mechanism in 2017 with a view to the review being completed by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-third session (November 2017).
	
		
Annex
	Executive summary of the technical paper on the fifth review of the Financial Mechanism
I.	Background
1.	At its 6th meeting, the Standing Committee on Finance requested the secretariat to prepare a technical paper that will inform the Committee in its deliberations on the effectiveness of the Financial Mechanism and in the drafting of its expert inputs, which will be submitted to the Conference of the Parties (COP) at its twentieth session. The technical paper builds on the criteria for the review agreed by Parties at COP 19. These criteria have been grouped in the following clusters of issues: (i) governance; (ii) responsiveness to COP guidance; (iii) mobilization of financial resources; (iv) delivery of financial resources; (v) results and impacts achieved with the resources provided; (vi) consistency of the activities of the Financial Mechanism with the objectives of the Convention; (vii) consistency and complementarity of the Financial Mechanism with the other sources of investment and financial flows.
2.	This technical paper is informed by desk research and literature review of the sources of information identified in the updated guidelines, complemented with past decisions related to the Financial Mechanism as well as inputs from the secretariats of the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism. Interviews with the stakeholders of the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism were also undertaken in order to generate further information. Furthermore, the technical paper also benefited from information included in the 2014 biennial assessment and overview of financial flows prepared by the Standing Committee on Finance. As there was a time limitation, it was not possible to expand the research beyond the available literature and conduct surveys on an appropriate sample of recipient countries in order to complement the areas where updated information was not available. Such an approach, however, could be undertaken in preparing for the sixth review of the Financial Mechanism.
3.	The Standing Committee on Finance, having considered the technical paper, prepared this executive summary to form its expert input to the fifth review of the Financial Mechanism.
II.	Key insights, conclusions and possible recommendations
	A.	Governance
		1.	Transparency of the decision-making process of the operating entities
		4.	An independent assessment by Transparency International evaluated the decision-making process of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) as being fairly transparent and democratic to all its stakeholders. The stakeholders of the GEF include the Parties to the relevant Conventions, the COP, donors, civil society organizations and non-governmental organizations. Decisions of the GEF Assembly and the GEF Council are made by consensus, following consultation with stakeholders who have advance access to background documents, which are prepared for these two decision-making bodies. The meetings of the GEF Council are webcast and all Council documents and decisions are available online.
		5.	While it was found that there is transparency at the level of the GEF Assembly and the GEF Council, Transparency International indicated that there remains room for improvement with regard to transparency in information disclosure by GEF agencies to GEF stakeholders. Furthermore, the fourth overall performance study of the GEF also highlighted a lack of transparency at the identification phase of GEF projects.
		6.	Owing to the fact that the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) and the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) follow the policies, procedures and governance structure of the GEF, their stakeholders experience similar challenges to the GEF regarding transparency and accountability at the level of project implementation.
		7.	The governance structure of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) follows a constituency model, with an established board composed of an equal number of members from developed and developing countries. The GCF Board is independent, accountable to the COP and aims to promote transparent decision-making. The Board members are selected by their respective constituency or by a regional group within their constituency. The GCF Board meetings are not webcast but they are recorded, and the recordings are made available online three weeks after the meeting for registered users, while the meeting documents are made publicly available online before each meeting of the Board.
		Conclusions
			8.	Based on the review by Transparency International, there is evidence that the decision-making process at the GEF is transparent. The operations and interactions of the implementing agencies of the GEF with the recipient countries during project implementation could benefit from further transparency of information disclosure on the status of implementation of the projects. This transparency is particularly critical in those recipient countries where project implementation capacity is weak.
			9.	With respect to the transparency at the project preparation phase, the review found that the national portfolio formulation exercises (NPFEs) promoted by the GEF during the fifth replenishment period of the GEF (GEF 5) has helped to improve the transparency of project preparation. Recipient countries are therefore encouraged to continue to undertake the NPFEs in order to facilitate the identification of projects.
			2.	Level of stakeholder involvement
			10.	The GEF has fostered a high level of participation from civil society organizations (CSOs), and the private sector. The GEF Civil Society Organization Network, which comprises all accredited CSOs to the GEF, takes part in the GEF process from upstream policy development to project implementation at both national and local levels. The GEF Council meetings are preceded by a meeting of the GEF Civil Society Organization Network, and in addition, two CSO representatives participate in GEF Council meetings as observers and are invited to make interventions during those meetings. The GEF is currently reviewing the Policy on Public Involvement in GEF projects, in consultation with the GEF Civil Society Organization Network, in order to formulate draft guidelines for public involvement to be presented to the GEF Council in October 2014.
			11.	The Governing Instrument of the GCF mandates the GCF Board to make arrangements, including developing and operating accreditation processes, to allow for effective participation by accredited observers in its meetings and to invite, to participate as active observers, two civil society representatives: one each from developing and developed countries, and two private sector representatives, one each from developing and developed countries.
			12.	The GCF Board adopted additional rules of procedure for the Board relating to observers and an accreditation process for observers to the Fund was put in place. To date, 183 organizations including CSOs, private sector organizations and international entities have been accredited as observers to GCF Board meetings. Furthermore, all four accredited active observers from civil society and the private sector participate in GCF Board meetings and are invited to make interventions.
		Conclusion and recommendation
			13.	The GEF has been successful in ensuring stakeholder involvement both at the level of the GEF Council and in project implementation.
			14.	The GCF could build on the experience of and lessons learned from the GEF in terms of stakeholder involvement. In this regard, the GCF may consider establishing a robust consultative process with its observers in order to ensure that adequate and timely consultation is undertaken with respect to the development of its policies, procedures, guidelines, and, later on, during the implementation of programmes and projects of the Fund.
			3.	Gender-sensitive approaches
			15.	The sub-study on gender mainstreaming made in the context of the fifth overall performance study of the GEF found that the GEF secretariat had made significant efforts to implement a gender mainstreaming policy, while there was scope for improvement in the application of the policy by GEF agencies. In addition, the policy recommendation of the sixth replenishment period of the GEF on further work on gender mainstreaming emphasized that more concerted efforts need to be made in order to enhance gender mainstreaming within the GEF. Accordingly, the GEF secretariat is currently developing a Gender Action Plan, which will identify ways to enhance gender mainstreaming, including the use of relevant gender-sensitive indicators and sex-disaggregated data. The Action Plan will be presented to the GEF Council in October 2014.
			16.	In the light of the provisions of its governing instrument to take a Fund-wide “gender-sensitive approach”, the GCF has committed to integrating gender considerations in its procedures and operational modalities. At its seventh meeting, the GCF Board approved an initial results management framework with provisions for sex-disaggregated indicators, including initial criteria for assessing programmes and projects proposals that include gender aspects. The GCF secretariat is currently preparing a draft gender action policy and action plan for consideration by the Board at its meeting in October 2014.
		Conclusion and recommendation
			17.	The GEF has made considerable progress in mainstreaming gender into its activities. Since there is scope for improvement, an action plan is to be approved by the GEF Council in October 2014 and the results of this progress are expected to be reflected in the programmes and projects of the GEF.
			18.	In developing its own approach to gender mainstreaming, the GCF could build on the experience of the GEF. It is recommended that gender equality be integrated in the structure and organization of the GCF itself, and that gender-sensitive criteria be taken into account in funding approvals of the Fund.
			4.	Environmental and social safeguards
			19.	The GEF Policy on Agency Minimum Standards on Environment and Social Safeguards applies across all GEF agencies. Moreover, all entities seeking to be accredited must demonstrate not only that their internal policies and procedures comply with minimum standards, but also that the entities themselves have the institutional capacities and systems in place to implement those standards. To date, all existing GEF agencies are in compliance with the environmental and social safeguards of the GEF.
			20.	The GCF Board has adopted, on an interim basis, the International Financial Corporation’s IFC Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability, with a view to developing its own environmental and social safeguard policy within three years of becoming operational.
		Conclusion and recommendation
			21.	As the GCF is developing its own environment and social safeguards, it should consider consistency with the safeguards of the GEF.
			22.	Since the GCF will also be using financial intermediaries such as commercial banks, it is recommended that the GCF also develop an appropriate oversight mechanism to ensure that the institutions to which these intermediaries will channel funding also comply with the environmental policies and social safeguards of the GCF.
			5.	Fiduciary standards
			23.	The minimum fiduciary standards of the GEF build on international best practices. GEF agencies are responsible for monitoring and implementing these standards. To date, all existing GEF agencies are in compliance with the minimum fiduciary standards established by the GEF.
			24.	At its 7th meeting, the GCF Board adopted initial fiduciary principles and standards, which will be reviewed within three years of their adoption. The GCF Board also requested the secretariat to develop, under the guidance of an accreditation panel established by the Board, additional specialized fiduciary standards that may be deemed necessary in order to effectively accommodate all capacities that are required in implementing entities and intermediaries in the initial phase of operations of the Fund.
		Recommendation
			25.	As it monitors the use of its initial fiduciary standards and reviews those standards within the next three years, the GCF should consider maintaining consistency with the standards of the GEF.
			B.	Responsiveness to Conference of the Parties guidance
				1.	Level of responsiveness to Conference of the Parties guidance
				26.	In assessing the responsiveness of the GEF to COP guidance, the fifth overall performance study found that the guidance by the COP is fully reflected in the strategies of the GEF and that requests from the COP are largely taken into account in programming GEF resources. It concludes that the level of responsiveness of the GEF to COP guidance is high both at the strategic and portfolio levels.
				27.	Some of the Parties and stakeholders of the GEF viewed the GEF to be slow in operationalizing some of the guidance provided by the COP. The fifth overall performance study of the GEF, however, indicated that there are a few issues that made it difficult for the GEF to respond to the guidance received including: (i) the lack of clarity and prioritization in the guidance; (ii) the repetitive nature of the guidance, which has led to an enormous volume of requests to the GEF; and (iii) the timing of the provision of guidance that falls between replenishments of the GEF.
				Conclusion and recommendation
					28.	The Evaluation Office of the GEF has found that the GEF is highly responsive to COP guidance, and that it has taken considerable steps to report to the COP in this regard. The GEF is encouraged to continue to provide information on how it has responded to the guidance it has received via its report to the COP.
					29.	As the GCF is under development, it is too early to assess the level of its responsiveness to COP guidance. However, the efforts made by the GCF Board to respond to COP guidance can be acknowledged.
					2.	Efficiency of the Global Environment Facility project cycle
					30.	The GEF has been making considerable efforts over the past 10 years to improve the efficiency of its project cycle. Full size projects (FSPs) approved during the first replenishment period of the GEF took an average of 36 months to progress through the project preparation cycle. This already lengthy preparation time increased to 50 months for projects during the second replenishment period of the GEF, and to 66 months for projects during the third replenishment period of the GEF. However, during GEF 5, the average time for preparation of GEF project cycle dropped to 18.5 months, as the GEF Council established a standard time frame of 18 months for project preparation.
					31.	Since 2012, the GEF has undertaken a series of measures that seek to improve the efficiency of its project cycle, including a pilot project for the harmonization of the GEF and World Bank project cycles. The policy recommendation of the sixth replenishment period of the GEF (GEF 6) on improving the efficiency of the GEF project cycle requested the GEF secretariat to continue to review the performance of the GEF against the current time frame standard of 18 months from GEF Council approval and endorsement by the Chief Executive Officer of the GEF to identify: (i) more effective measures with which to expedite project preparation; and (ii) an appropriate standard project cycle time frame for the GEF 6.
					32.	Consequently, the GEF secretariat will prepare, for consideration by the GEF Council at its meeting in October 2014, a set of further measures to improve the policies and procedures associated with the full project cycle, including the programmatic approach and a proposal for a policy on the cancellation of projects that exceed time frame targets for project preparation as requested by the GEF Council at its November 2013 meeting.
				Conclusion
					33.	It is recognized that the GEF has undertaken measures to improve the length and efficiency of its project cycle over the years. These measures have resulted in significant improvements and the GEF is encouraged to continue undertaking such measures.
					C.	Mobilization of financial resources
						1.	Amount of resources provided to developing countries
						34.	The GEF Trust Fund has been the primary source of grants provided to developing countries though the Financial Mechanism. Funding for climate change mitigation by the GEF has increased steadily from the GEF pilot phase to GEF 5. As at June 2014, the GEF has funded 787 projects on climate change mitigation amounting to more than USD 4.5 billion. Specifically, during GEF 5, about USD 1.2 billion of GEF funding was programmed for direct mitigation projects. Moreover in April 2014, donors pledged USD 4.43 billion to the GEF for GEF 6 (July 2014 to June 2018).
						35.	With the complete programming of the USD 50 million allocation for the strategic priority on adaptation under the GEF Trust Fund, funding in support of adaptation at the GEF is now delivered directly through the LDCF and the SCCF. As at 30 June 2014, about USD 1.3 billion overall has been programmed by the GEF for adaptation.
						36.	The LDCF and the SCCF rely on voluntary contributions from developed countries and have experienced increasing trends in contributions. Cumulative pledges to the LDCF went from USD 292 million in October 2010 to about USD 900 million in June 2014 (96 per cent has been disbursed by developed countries), while cumulative pledges to the SCCF went from USD 167 million in October 2010 to about USD 344 million in June 2014 (94 per cent has been disbursed by developed countries).
						37.	An important milestone was achieved at the 7th meeting of the GCF Board, when it completed the eight essential requirements for the Fund to receive, manage, programme and disburse resources, and thereby decided to commence the process for an initial resource mobilization. Although no numerical figure or target was defined for this initial resource mobilization, it was agreed that it would be commensurate with the ambition of the Fund to promote the paradigm shift towards low-emission and climate-resilient development pathways in developing countries.
						Conclusion
							38.	The GEF has mobilized resources via a replenishment process (GEF Trust Fund) and voluntary channels for the LDCF and the SCCF. Additional resources are mobilized by co-financing for GEF funds. Through the aforementioned resources, combined, the GEF has raised considerable funds for climate change.
							2.	Amount of finance leveraged and modalities of co-financing
							39.	From the estimates of co-financing ratios achieved by the GEF, climate change has attained the highest co-financing ratios. As a result, climate change constitutes about 50 per cent of the total co-financing mobilized by the GEF. However, caution should be exercised when looking at these ratios, as they mask a high variability in these ratios at the project level, and the flexibility accorded by the GEF to least developed countries (LDCs) and small island developing States (SIDS), from which a higher level of co-financing is not necessarily requested during the approval process.
							40.	National governments have been the main source of co-financing (equivalent to about 41 per cent of the fourth replenishment of the GEF (GEF 4) and GEF 5 co-financing that has been mobilized), followed by the GEF agencies as the second highest provider of co-financing (about 25 per cent of GEF 4 and GEF 5 total co-financing), the private sector and bilateral, multilateral sources, foundations or NGOs.
							41.	Two main issues have been raised within the GEF partnership with regards to co-financing. The first is the lack of clarity in the definition and application of co-financing by the GEF. The second is that the process for seeking co-financing can delay the project cycle significantly. At its 46th meeting, in May 2014, the GEF Council approved a “revised co-financing policy”, in response to the policy recommendations of GEF 6 on co-financing and the request made by the COP to the GEF, in order to clarify the concept of co-financing and its application to the review of funding proposals. The new policy clarifies the definition of co-financing and approaches to promoting effective co-financing. It also sets a goal for the overall GEF portfolio of reaching a co-financing ratio of at least USD 6 (co-financing) to USD 1 (GEF) with the expectation of greater co-financing in upper middle income countries that are not SIDS. There are no project-specific co-financing requirements.
						Conclusion and recommendation
							42.	In order to expedite the project cycle during GEF 6, the GEF should ensure that its co-financing policy is clearly understood and appropriately applied by accredited GEF project agencies and GEF implementing agencies.
							3.	Adequacy, predictability and sustainability of funds
							43.	With a replenishment process taking place every four years, funding to the GEF Trust Fund is provided in a predictable and sustainable manner by developed countries. As no assessment of the financing needs of developing countries has been agreed on at the level of the Convention, it is challenging to assess the adequacy of the financing provided to the GEF. Furthermore, since GEF is only a channel through which financial support is provided to developing countries, an assessment of the adequacy of resources mobilized for developing countries that looks only at the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism will be misleading because of its narrow scope.
							44.	Through the application of its System for Transparent Allocation of Resources (STAR), the GEF has made the funding for its recipient countries, especially SIDS and LDCs, fairly predictable. The midterm evaluation undertaken by the GEF Independent Evaluation Office highlighted that STAR has contributed to making GEF operations more relevant to country needs and priorities and has led to greater transparency in GEF operations. As a result, high levels of utilization of STAR allocations were experienced during GEF 5 by all GEF recipients, with an 85 and 80 per cent utilization of overall STAR allocations by SIDS and the LDCs, respectively. Moreover, the GEF 6 policy recommendation on updating STAR stipulates measures to increase the funding allocations for the LDCs.
							45.	Although the LDCF has seen considerable growth over recent years, additional contributions are needed if the Fund is to meet the full costs of addressing the urgent and immediate adaptation needs of the LDCs. For example, as at September 2014, no resources were available for new funding approvals under the LDCF, whereas resources amounting to USD 41.8 million were sought for five full-sized projects that had been technically cleared by the GEF secretariat. For the next GEF cycle (2014–2018), the GEF has estimated the financing needs of the LDCF at USD 700–900 million.
							46.	Despite a successful record both in terms of positive evaluations and accelerated approval and disbursement rates, the main obstacle to adaptation programming under the SCCF remains the lack of adequate and predictable resources. Given the continued high demand for resources from the SCCF, the GEF has reported that, for example during the fiscal year 2014, the SCCF could meet less than 30 per cent of the demand reported in the priority project documents submitted to the GEF secretariat for technical review and in the relevant work programme entry. The GEF has estimated the financing needs of the SCCF for 2014–2018 at USD 400–500 million.
							47.	STAR does not apply to LDCF and SCCF funding. However, the LDCF applies a principle of 'equitable access” to ensure that funding is available to all LDCs. This principle includes a ceiling intended to prevent countries with strong institutional capacity in preparing projects from depleting the limited resources of the LDCF, to the disadvantage of other LDCs. In April 2014, the ceiling was increased from USD 20 million to USD 30 million in response to the significant, additional contributions received between June and December 2013.
							48.	The GCF is expected to eventually have a replenishment process, as the GEF does. The GCF will aim for an equal allocation of finance to mitigation and adaptation projects over time, and for at least 50 per cent of the adaptation finance to be allocated to particularly vulnerable countries, including the LDCs, SIDS and the African States. The Board has also decided to maximize the engagement of the private sector, including through significant allocation to the Private Sector Facility of the Fund.
						Conclusion and recommendations
							49.	The financing for climate change from the GEF Trust Fund increased significantly from GEF 4 to GEF 5. While the allocation to the GEF 6 climate change focal area has slightly decreased compared with GEF 5, there are several climate-relevant components in the new integrated approaches and within the sustainable forest management set-aside. Overall, financing for climate change related interventions has continued to increase from GEF 5 to GEF 6. Moreover, the GEF Trust Fund is considered to be predictable and sustainable. Its adequacy, however, cannot be determined since the GEF is only one of the many financing channels for climate change in developing countries.
							50.	The review has found that the funds provided to the LDCF and SCCF have substantially increased over the period of the review. The needs, however, have also increased during that period and there remains a backlog of fundable projects. Financing is provided to these funds via voluntary channels and is therefore not considered predictable and sustainable.
							51.	The GEF and the GCF may consider collaborating in the use of funding pathways that may include the LDCF and the SCCF.
							D.	Delivery of financial resources
								1.	Accessibility to funds
								52.	The GEF delivers financing to recipient countries’ governments, to NGOs and to the private sector. This is guided by a country allocation for the different focal areas of the GEF Trust Fund. There is no allocation system for the LDCF and the SCCF. However, the GEF has established a ceiling for the LDCF in order to prevent countries with strong institutional capacity in preparing projects from depleting the limited resources of the LDCF, to the disadvantage of the other LDCs. The GEF has also established a process for direct access to the GEF Trust Fund for enabling activities, but only a few countries have applied such direct access.
								53.	The allocation parameters and procedures of the GEF and its agencies, as well as the capacity of countries to formulate and develop proposals, affect developing countries’ access to the GEF. To further assist countries, the GEF secretariat is working to directly engage countries and increase their awareness and understanding of policies and procedures of the GEF. This is done through national dialogues and other such mechanisms.
								54.	During GEF 5, all developing countries including LDCs and SIDS were able to programme their STAR allocation. Estimates of the overall utilization of STAR allocations by developing countries show an uptake of 93 per cent for the overall GEF Trust Fund, with 80 and 85 per cent of utilization by LDCs and SIDS, respectively. While some of the barriers to accessing the GEF Fund were solved with STAR, co-financing remains an obstacle to access, especially for the LDCs and SIDS.
								55.	The GEF Council in 2010 decided to accredit up to 10 new GEF project agencies, at least half of them based in developing countries, in order to expand the range of agencies with which GEF recipient countries could work. Out of the 10 new project agencies to be accredited, the GEF aims to accredit at least 5 national institutions with a regional balance, at least 1 national institution from an LDC and at least 1 national institution from a middle income country. This process has moved slower than expected and the GEF is reviewing its strategy in the light of the findings of the report on the fifth overall performance study of the GEF.
								56.	The GCF will allow direct access to it by national institutions based in developing countries. The GCF readiness program is intended to foster a better direct engagement between it and its recipient countries. It will provide technical and capacity-building support for implementing entities (particularly national and subnational institutions) that may not meet the standards of the Fund yet.
								Conclusion and recommendation
									57.	The GEF has made a significant effort to inform countries of the programmes and policies of the GEF, and as a result, recipient countries have utilized most of their allocations. Nevertheless, the LDCs and SIDS still face challenges in accessing all of their resources.
									58.	The GCF would benefit from lessons learned on the accreditation process from other funds, particularly the GEF. In the case of the GEF, the goal of accreditation of 10 project agencies was only partially achieved. The GCF may consider building on existing systems of GEF intermediaries and implementing entities, and may in the process also consider providing financial assistance to support the accreditation of national entities in recipient countries that may need it.
									2.	Disbursement of funds
									59.	The speed and efficiency of disbursement appears to be improving at the GEF, despite some challenges. While the number of projects delayed by more than two years is substantially reduced compared with GEF 4 levels, information on the amount of funding that has actually been disbursed by GEF agencies to recipient countries has not been made available in an integrated form owing to a lack of reliability of data, which is due to a lack of standard definitions of when “disbursement” takes place from GEF agencies to recipient countries. Countries have identified slow disbursements as a reason for project delays. The GEF is currently working on harmonizing the timeline for the disbursement of funds and setting performance targets.
									60.	There has been significant emphasis on disbursement in the LDCF and the SCCF. In the case of the former, the May 2014 annual monitoring report finds that active projects amounted to USD 134.98 million as at 30 June 2013, of which USD 46.49 million had been disbursed, representing an average disbursement rate of 38 per cent. The SCCF had committed USD 94.29 million to 21 projects by 30 June 2013, of which USD 33.22 million or 32 per cent had been disbursed.
								Conclusion
									61.	There is a recognized need to strengthen GEF project monitoring systems in order to be able to provide better information on the level of disbursement of approved funds. The GEF should work with its agencies on establishing a standard definition of “disbursement” in order to generate a common understanding of the term within the GEF partnership and enhance transparency of its processes.
									3.	Country ownership of programmes and projects
									62.	Efforts were made to strengthen the country ownership of GEF programmes and projects during GEF 5. In this regard, the midterm reviews of the experiences with STAR suggest that the clarity that countries now have on the scale and scope of their GEF allocation has contributed to strengthening the ownership of programming at the GEF. Additionally, countries are now also supported to undertake an NPFE to engage across governments and relevant stakeholders on how GEF resources should best be used and prioritized. In the majority of cases, the NPFE provided a helpful framework for interaction between the GEF and stakeholders, but its uptake during GEF 5 was relatively low. Participants to the GEF-6 replenishment process encouraged recipient countries to undertake NPFEs as early as possible so as to facilitate the programming of GEF 6 country allocations.
									63.	The concept of country ownership has been a driving principle in the design of the GCF. It is also a key element of the GCF investment framework approved in May 2014. Coherence with national policies and strategies and engagement with national stakeholders will be key considerations in fostering country ownership in the actions of the GCF. A transparent no-objection procedure is to be developed to this end. Through early investments in readiness, the GCF secretariat is beginning the process of engagement with countries in order to understand their priorities.
								Recommendation
									64.	There is a recognized need to continue to deepen engagement at different levels of the GEF partnership as a means of fostering ownership of projects and programmes in recipient countries. Upfront support in facilitating national stakeholder engagement on how best to use country allocations has proven to be useful when done through NPFEs. Developing countries should continue to undertake NPFEs in order to facilitate the programming of their GEF 6 STAR allocations.
									4.	Sustainability of programmes and projects
									65.	The GEF defines sustainability as the maintenance of the benefits of the project and programs beyond the life of the GEF intervention. In this regard, the review found that 70 per cent of GEF projects have been rated moderately satisfactory or higher in terms of their sustainability. Financial and institutional risks, as well as staff turnover and changes in government priorities have been highlighted as potential impediments to sustainability. Mainstreaming of the activities of the projects has been found to be best practice. However, mainstreaming normally requires time that goes well beyond the life of the project.
								Conclusion
									66.	Policy and legislative changes as well as mainstreaming have been found to promote sustainability, but cannot always be fully implemented within the lifetime of the project.
									5.	Enabling environments
									67.	A significant share of GEF 5 programmes have sought to strengthen policy and regulatory environments in order to support low-emission and climate-resilient development. In this regard, a recent evaluation of GEF support for mitigation documented causal links between support and key policy changes in a third of the projects that it reviewed. It emphasized the importance of public sector institutions, strategies and policies for the private sector replication of the approaches piloted. It found that enabling programmes that engaged key non-governmental stakeholders (including the private sector) that could be advocates for policy change were more successful.
									68.	Country-driven GEF projects that aim to develop and enact key policy changes may improve the enabling environment in recipient countries. However, it should be noted that strengthening policy and regulatory environments may require more time than a single GEF project cycle.
								Conclusion
									69.	There is ample room for the GCF to learn from the experiences of other funds in terms of improving the enabling environments in recipient countries. It can do this by linking investments with focused efforts to engage stakeholders within countries in programming, and by providing technical assistance and capacity-building so as to strengthen enabling environments – institutions, policies, and regulations – that support mitigation and adaptation actions in developing countries.
									E.	Results and impacts
									70.	In an effort to assess the impacts of its activities, the GEF has created a results-based management (RBM) framework and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) requirements. The fifth overall performance study, however, has reported that the RBM framework and M&E requirements of the GEF are too onerous to be executed and had recommended that the RBM framework of GEF 6 include a limited number of outcomes that can be measured through existing or easily generated data.
									71.	As a result, the GEF has made and is continuing to make efforts to streamline its RBM framework in order to improve the measurement of the results and impacts of its activities.
									1.	Mitigation results
									72.	The fifth overall performance study of the GEF found that as at 30 June 2013, the GEF had allocated a total of USD 3.3 billion to 615 projects that address climate change mitigation, of which USD 3.1 billion has been allocated to 547 projects with mitigation targets. The total amount of direct and indirect mitigation impact expected from these projects is 2.6 and 8.2 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2 eq) emissions, respectively, or 10.8 billion tonnes of CO2 eq combined.
									73.	Despite improving the methodologies for the measurement of greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions, evaluations by the GEF of mitigation impact stress the difficulties of consistent reporting. The key underpinning parameters are dynamic, and this may result in substantial changes to realized GHG emission reductions. Similarly, assessing the cost-effectiveness of interventions is difficult. The GEF has initiated a work programme in order to improve its methodologies and systems for measuring GHG reductions more consistently.
									2.	Adaptation results
									74.	Over the years, the adaptation programme of the GEF (the GEF Trust Fund, the LDCF and the SCCF) has supported focused efforts to help developing countries to adapt to and strengthen their resilience to the impacts of climate change. As at 26 September 2014, a total of 79 LDCF projects provided an estimate of the expected number of direct beneficiaries. These projects, with LDCF resources amounting to USD 386.31 million, seek to reduce the vulnerability of an estimated 8.1 million people directly. Forty-nine LDCF projects support 35 countries in their efforts to integrate climate change adaptation into 112 national development policies, plans and frameworks. The LDCF also assists countries in laying the groundwork for climate-resilient development planning through 51 projects that will enable 34 countries to strengthen their national hydro-meteorological and climate information services.
									75.	Under the SCCF, 32 projects provided an estimated number of direct beneficiaries as at 26 September 2014. These projects, to which SCCF resources amounting to USD 135.72 million have been allocated, aim to reduce the vulnerability of an estimated 3.54 million people directly. In addition, 19 SCCF projects are already supporting 34 countries in their efforts to integrate climate change adaptation into 102 national development policies, plans and frameworks.
								Recommendation to strengthen adaptation and mitigation results
									76.	The GEF and the GCF may consider collaborating to harmonize impact indicators and set new norms around reporting practice, especially in the context of adaptation finance. Furthermore, the operationalization of the GCF results-based management framework presents an opportunity to make progress in this regard.
									3.	Technology transfer
									77.	During GEF 5, the GEF promoted technology transfer at various stages of the technology development cycle, from demonstration of innovative emerging low-emission and climate-resilient technologies to diffusion of commercially proven environmentally sound technologies and practices. Moreover, support for technology transfer has also been delivered in the context of the Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer for which a funding window of USD 50 million was created at the GEF with funds from both the GEF Trust Fund and the SCCF. The GEF has also supported the operationalization of the Climate Technology Centre and Network.
									4.	Capacity-building
									78.	The GEF has made significant investments in capacity-building, including through cross-cutting capacity-building projects as well as through capacity gained in the design and implementation of projects. Investments of the GEF covered most of the priority areas listed in the framework for capacity-building in developing countries. Furthermore, capacity-building replication and scaling up, and climate change mainstreaming into national development planning are becoming increasingly common practice within the GEF. For example, several GEF small grant projects developed into medium- and full-sized projects.
								Conclusion on results and impacts
									79.	There is evidence that good results and impacts have been achieved with the resources provided by the GEF. Efforts to harmonize and improve the methodologies for measuring the results and impacts of the supported activities need to continue.
									F.	Consistency of the Financial Mechanism with the objective of the Convention
									80.	Article 2 of the Convention stipulates that the ultimate objective of this Convention and any legal instrument adopted by the Convention is to achieve, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Convention, stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system, within a time frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food production is not threatened and to enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner. Furthermore, in accordance with decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 4, the long-term goal of holding the increase in the global average temperature below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels was recognized.
									81.	The review found that as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism, the GEF, through its projects and programmes, contributes to supporting developing countries in meeting the objective of the Convention, while enhancing their resilience to the adverse effects of climate change. In relation to the below 2 °C goal, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has noted that emission patterns that limit temperature increase from pre-industrial levels to no more than 2 °C require considerably different patterns of investment.
								Conclusion
									82.	The GEF programmes and policies are consistent with the objectives of the Convention.
									G.	Consistency and complementarity of the Financial Mechanism with the other financial flows and sources of investment
									83.	Decision 11/CP.1, paragraph 2(a), provides that “consistency should be sought and maintained between the activities (including those related to funding) relevant to climate change undertaken outside the framework of the financial mechanism and the policies, programme priorities and eligibility criteria for activities as relevant, established by the Conference of the Parties”.
									84.	In terms of activities funded outside the framework of the Financial Mechanism of the Convention, the clean development mechanism (CDM) has been a successful incentive to implement mitigation action in developing countries. By the end of 2013, over 7,400 CDM projects had been registered in 93 developing countries, representing an estimated investment in excess of USD 400 billion and amounting to 1.46 billion certified emission reductions issued (or a reduction of 1.46 billion tonnes of CO2 eq).
									85.	Additionally, the Clean Technology Fund (of the Climate Investment Funds (CIFs)), currently the largest multilateral mitigation fund with a cumulative capitalization of USD 5.5 billion, has been providing grants and concessional loans to developing countries.
									86.	While the Adaptation Fund (AF) has been an important vehicle in providing support for adaptation in developing countries. It was established to finance concrete adaptation projects and programmes in developing countries, and since its inception has allocated USD 232 million of grants to 40 developing countries. The AF has also pioneered direct access with the accreditation of national implementing entities (NIEs) in developing countries which can directly access the Fund without having to go through intermediaries. To date, 17 NIEs have been accredited to the AF.
									87.	Another channel that has supported adaptation in developing countries is the Pilot Programme for Climate Resilience (PPCR) of the CIFs. The PPCR funds technical assistance and investments in order to support countries’ efforts to integrate climate risk and resilience into core development planning and implementation. With total pledges amounting to USD 1.3 billion, the PPCR provides incentives for scaled-up action and initiates transformational change by catalysing a shift from ‘business as usual’ to broad-based strategies for achieving climate resilience at the national level.
									88.	In terms of ensuring complementarity with the other financial flows and sources of investment, the GEF has reported that it continues to work collaboratively with other organizations on financing complementary activities. For example, synergies have been highlighted between the Clean Technology Fund and the GEF climate change focal area, as well as between the pilot programme on climate resilience and the LDCF and the SCCF. Furthermore, the GEF and the AF have been working collaboratively in order to enhance synergies and avoid duplication of their respective actions in developing countries.
									89.	With the establishment of the GCF, the risk of overlap among the activities financed within and outside the Convention is high. Although duplication is not desirable, it may not be the most important issue at this time, since, as outlined in the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, much more significant climate financing is needed than that provided at present through all of these funds combined. Moreover, the funds can collaborate with each other to learn lessons from one another’s programmes and to set common performance targets. In this context, the respective funds under the Convention should be actively engaging on their strategic positioning towards the GCF and how they could foster complementarity with it.
									90.	The governing instrument of the GCF provides that the Board will develop methods to enhance complementarity between the activities of the Fund and the activities of other relevant bilateral, regional and global funding mechanisms and institutions to better mobilize the full range of financial and technical capacities.
								Conclusions and recommendations
									91.	The GEF has developed policies and programmes that have allowed it to be complementary to the community of climate finance providers.
									92.	The operating entities of the Financial Mechanism and the funds under the Convention should collaborate with the view to taking advantage of the complementarity of their respective policies and programmes. The operating entities of the Financial Mechanism should provide information on the progress made in ensuring the complementarity with the other sources of climate finance in their respective reports to the COP.
									93.	The Standing Committee on Finance could take into account the information on the efforts of the operating entities to enhance complementarity, when providing draft guidance for consideration by the COP.
								10th plenary meeting
								13 December 2014
								31.	
	Decision 10/CP.20
	Further guidance to the Least Developed Countries Fund
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recognizing the specific needs and special circumstances of the least developed countries, as referred to in Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Convention,
		Recalling decisions 6/CP.9, 3/CP.11, 5/CP.14, 5/CP.16, 9/CP.17 and 10/CP.18,
		Also recalling the least developed countries work programme, as defined in decision 5/CP.7,
		1.	Welcomes the increased allocation and disbursement of funds to the least developed country Parties under the Least Developed Countries Fund;
		2.	Notes with appreciation the additional contributions made by Parties to the Least Developed Countries Fund;
			3.	Notes the report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties at its twentieth session, and the synthesis report prepared by the secretariat on the progress made in the implementation of the remaining elements of the least developed countries work programme;
		4.	Also notes the submission from a Party on behalf of a group of Parties on information on experiences with the implementation of the remaining elements of the least developed countries work programme;
			5.	Further notes that the Least Developed Countries Fund has financed the preparation of 51 national adaptation programmes of action, of which 50 have been completed, and has approved the funding for 159 national adaptation programmes of action implementation projects and for programmes in 48 least developed countries (as at 3 December 2014);
		6.	Encourages developed country Parties and other Parties in a position to do so to continue contributing on a voluntary basis to the Least Developed Countries Fund in order to support the implementation of the least developed countries work programme;
		7.	Invites the Global Environment Facility, as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism of the Convention entrusted with the operation of the Least Developed Countries Fund, to continue to support the remaining activities contained in the least developed countries work programme;
		8.	Requests the Global Environment Facility, as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism of the Convention entrusted with the operation of the Least Developed Countries Fund, to share, in its next report, lessons learned and progress made in its pilot accreditation of Global Environment Facility national project agencies;
			9.	Invites the Global Environment Facility, as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism of the Convention entrusted with the operation of the Least Developed Countries Fund, to include, in its annual report to the Conference of the Parties, information on specific actions that it has undertaken to implement the remaining elements of the least developed countries work programme, including the updating and implementation of national adaptation programmes of action, with a view to the Conference of the Parties determining, at its twenty-first session (November–December 2015), appropriate further guidance to be provided to the Global Environment Facility;
		10.	Requests the Global Environment Facility, as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism of the Convention entrusted with the operation of the Least Developed Countries Fund, to enhance communication with its implementing agencies and to encourage its implementing agencies to enhance their communication with countries to facilitate a timely implementation of other elements of the least developed countries work programme including national adaptation programmes of action.
		10th plenary meeting
		12 December 2014
		32.	
	Decision 11/CP.20
	Methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling Articles 4, 5, 7, 10 and 12 of the Convention,
		Also recalling decisions 9/CP.2, 11/CP.4, 4/CP.5 and 1/CP.16, paragraph 40,
		1.	Decides to extend by one year the deadline of the mandate given to the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice, as referred to in decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 19, with a view to recommending a decision on the methodologies for the reporting of financial information, as referred to in decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 19, to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session (November–December 2015);
		2.	Invites Parties and observer organizations to submit to the secretariat, by 25 March 2015, views on the methodologies for the reporting of financial information, as referred to in decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 19, for compilation into a miscellaneous document;
		3.	Requests the secretariat to prepare a technical paper, prior to the forty-second sessions of the subsidiary bodies (June 2015), summarizing existing international methodologies and drawing on relevant information contained in submissions from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, as referred to in decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 17, on their experience with reporting the first biennial reports, the submissions referred to in paragraph 2 above, information submitted by Parties on appropriate methodologies and systems used to measure and track climate finance, as referred to in decision 5/CP.18, paragraph 10, and the work of the Standing Committee on Finance on the 2014 biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows;
		4.	Also requests the secretariat to organize a joint in-session technical workshop in conjunction with the forty-second sessions of the subsidiary bodies, drawing on the information referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 above, so as to inform the work of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice, as referred to in decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 19;
		5.	Decides that the workshop referred to in paragraph 4 above shall be jointly organized under the auspices of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice, the Subsidiary Body for Implementation and the Standing Committee on Finance;
		6.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance, as a part of its work on measurement, reporting and verification of support beyond the biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows, taking into consideration the outcomes of the joint in-session technical workshop referred to in paragraph 4 above, to include its recommendations on the methodologies for the reporting of financial information, as referred to in decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 19, in its annual report to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session;
		7.	Also requests the Standing Committee on Finance to present an update on its work on this matter to the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice for its consideration at its forty-third session (November–December 2015);
		8.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat pursuant to the provisions contained in paragraphs 3 and 4 above;
		9.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		10th plenary meeting
		12 December 2014
		33.	
	Decision 12/CP.20
	Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling decisions 6/CP.1, 6/CP.2, 25/CP.7 and 5/CP.13,
		7.	Welcomes the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change;
		8.	Expresses its appreciation and gratitude to all those involved in the preparation of the Fifth Assessment Report for their excellent work;
		9.	Recognizes that the Fifth Assessment Report represents the most comprehensive and robust assessment of climate change to date, providing an integrated scientific, technical and socioeconomic perspective on relevant issues;
		10.	Acknowledges that the Fifth Assessment Report provides the scientific foundation for the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action;
		11.	Urges Parties to the Convention to make use of the information contained in the Fifth Assessment Report in their discussions under all relevant agenda items;
		12.	Encourages Parties to draw on the information contained in the Fifth Assessment Report in the development of their national policies on climate change, as appropriate;
		13.	Invites the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to continue to provide relevant information to Parties on the scientific, technical and socioeconomic aspects of climate change, taking into account the work of the UNFCCC in determining its future products and assessment cycles;
		14.	Encourages Parties to continue to support the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
			10th plenary meeting
			12 December 2014
			
