|  | United Nations | FCCC/CP/2024/11/Add.1 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 27 March 2025  Original: English |

Conference of the Parties
Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twenty-ninth session, held in Baku from 11 to 24 November 2024
	Addendum
	Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty‑ninth session
	Contents
Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties
	Decision	Page
		1/CP.29	Long-term climate finance 		2
		2/CP.29	Matters relating to the Standing Committee on Finance		3
		3/CP.29	Report of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties and guidance to
the Green Climate Fund		6
		4/CP.29	Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties and
guidance to the Global Environment Facility		10
		5/CP.29	Report of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage and guidance to the Fund		14
		6/CP.29	Arrangements between the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties
serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board of the
Fund for responding to Loss and Damage		17
		7/CP.29	Gender and climate change		23
		8/CP.29	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate
Change Impacts and joint annual report of its Executive Committee and the
Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage
associated with the adverse effects of climate change		27
		9/CP.29	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer		34
		10/CP.29	Enhancing climate technology development and transfer through the Technology
Mechanism		35
	
Decision 1/CP.29
Long-term climate finance
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling Articles 4 and 11 of the Convention,
		Also recalling decisions 1/CP.16, paragraphs 2, 4 and 97–101, 2/CP.17, paragraphs 126–132, 4/CP.18, 3/CP.19, 5/CP.20, 1/CP.21, 5/CP.21, 7/CP.22, 6/CP.23, 3/CP.24, 1/CP.26, 4/CP.26, 13/CP.27 and 4/CP.28,
		1.	Recalls the commitment of developed country Parties, in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation, to a goal of mobilizing jointly USD 100 billion per year by 2020 to address the needs of developing country Parties in accordance with paragraph 98 of decision 1/CP.16;
		2.	Also recalls that, in accordance with paragraph 53 of decision 1/CP.21, developed country Parties reaffirmed the continuation of their existing collective mobilization goal through 2025 in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation;
		3.	Notes with appreciation the second report of the Standing Committee on Finance on progress towards achieving the goal of mobilizing jointly USD 100 billion per year to address the needs of developing countries in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation and the key findings presented therein, as well as the executive summary thereof and the recommendations therein;
		4.	Takes note of the activities referred to in paragraph 10 of decision 6/CP.23, otherwise known as the Needs-based Finance project;
		5.	Welcomes the deliberations at the sixth biennial high-level ministerial dialogue on climate finance and looks forward to the summary thereof, to be prepared by the President of the twenty-ninth session of the Conference of the Parties for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its thirtieth session (November 2025);
		6.	Takes note of the efforts undertaken by Parties at this session and looks forward to continuing deliberations on this matter at its thirtieth session.
		Resumed 11th plenary meeting
		24 November 2024
	
	Decision 2/CP.29
Matters relating to the Standing Committee on Finance
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling Articles 4 and 11 of the Convention,
	Also recalling decisions 12/CP.2, 12/CP.3, 1/CP.16, paragraph 112, 2/CP.17, paragraphs 120–121, 5/CP.18, 5/CP.19, 7/CP.19, 6/CP.20, 6/CP.21, 8/CP.22, 7/CP.23, 8/CP.23, 4/CP.24, 11/CP.25, 5/CP.26, 14/CP.27, 5/CMA.2, 10/CMA.3, 14/CMA.4, 5/CP.28 and 9/CMA.5,
	Taking note of decision 8/CMA.6,
	1.	Expresses gratitude to the Standing Committee on Finance and welcomes the work of the Committee in 2024;
	2.	Also welcomes the report of the Standing Committee on Finance for 2024 and notes the workplan of the Committee for 2025;
	3.	Also notes the importance of allocating time for consideration of the work of the Standing Committee on Finance;
	4.	Notes with appreciation the sixth Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows of the Standing Committee on Finance, including the summary and recommendations thereof;
	5.	Notes the Standing Committee on Finance’s update to its operational definition of climate finance in the context of preparing the sixth Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows;
	6.	Also notes that global climate finance flows were 63 per cent higher in 2021–2022 than in 2019–2020, reaching an annual average of USD 1.3 trillion, acknowledges that more than three quarters of those flows were in Eastern Asia, Northern and Western Europe and Northern America and recognizes the need to scale up climate finance flows in other regions;
	7.	Notes with appreciation the second report on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement, including the executive summary and recommendations thereof;
	8.	Notes the key finding from the report referred to in paragraph ‎7 above that nationally determined contributions from 142 Parties contain a total of 5,760 needs, of which 48 per cent are costed needs reported by 98 Parties, amounting to a cumulative USD 5.012–6.852 trillion out to 2030, or USD 455–584 billion annually across different time frames ending by 2030;
	9.	Highlights that information based on national reporting does not reflect the entirety of needs across developing country Parties and regions and is limited by significant data challenges and gaps, including differences and gaps in information on the processes and approaches used in determining needs; data being expressed for varying time frames, with the majority in a 2020–2030 time frame, and differences in methodologies and underlying assumptions used for identifying and costing needs, and also highlights that the number of needs and costed needs compiled from national reports should not be used to draw comparisons of actual needs across regions;
	10.	Invites relevant stakeholders to make use of the information contained in the second report on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement when supporting developing country Parties in identifying and costing needs, prioritizing the developing country Parties and regions that have not been able to identify and cost needs and that are significantly and proportionally underrepresented in the report;
	11.	Notes with appreciation the report on the common practices regarding climate finance definitions, reporting and accounting methods, including the executive summary thereof;
	12.	Recognizes the complexities associated with the diversity of definitions of climate finance in use by Parties and non-Party stakeholders in relation to ensuring clear, aggregated accounting and reporting of climate finance;
	13.	Reaffirms that the Standing Committee on Finance will continue its ongoing technical work on operational definitions of climate finance in its future biennial assessments and overviews of climate finance flows;
	14.	Welcomes the 2024 Forum of the Standing Committee on Finance on accelerating climate action and resilience through gender-responsive finance and notes with appreciation the summary report thereon;
	15.	Expresses sincere gratitude to the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania for its generous hospitality in hosting the 2024 Forum of the Standing Committee on Finance;
	16.	Expresses gratitude to the Governments of Australia, Austria and Canada for their financial support for the 2024 Forum of the Standing Committee on Finance;
	17.	Notes the continued importance of promoting gender-responsive climate action, including in the context of climate finance, and highlights the relevance of improving data and information on the gender-responsiveness of climate finance;
	18.	Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Standing Committee on Finance to strengthen its engagement with stakeholders in the context of its workplan, including UNFCCC constituted bodies and private sector and other entities outside the UNFCCC process, and encourages the Committee to continue such efforts in 2025, including, as appropriate, with people and communities on the front line of climate change, including Indigenous Peoples and local communities;
	19.	Also encourages the Standing Committee on Finance to continue enhancing its efforts to ensure gender-responsiveness in implementing its workplan and requests Parties to consider gender balance and geographical representation when nominating members to the Committee;
	20.	Recalls concerns about the working modalities of the Standing Committee on Finance for preparing the draft guidance for the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism in accordance with its mandate, and the request to Parties and other constituted bodies under the Convention and the Paris Agreement to provide elements for the draft guidance well in advance of future sessions of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to enable the Committee to fulfil its mandate in this regard;
	21.	Expresses appreciation to the Governments of Australia, Austria, Canada and Japan for their financial contributions for the work of the Standing Committee on Finance in 2024;
	22.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to report to the Conference of the Parties at its thirtieth session (November 2025) on its progress in implementing its workplan for 2025;
	23.	Also requests the Standing Committee on Finance to consider the guidance provided to it in other relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties.
	11th plenary meeting
	23 November 2024
	

	Decision 3/CP.29
	Report of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties and guidance to the Green Climate Fund
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling decision 3/CP.17, annex,
		1.	Welcomes the report of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-ninth session, including the information on action taken by the Board of the Green Climate Fund in response to guidance received from the Conference of the Parties, while noting that there is room for improvement;
		2.	Also welcomes the pledges and contributions to the second replenishment of the Green Climate Fund since the twenty-eighth session of the Conference of the Parties, acknowledges the efforts of those that have substantially increased their commitments and acknowledges with appreciation the role of the Government of the United Arab Emirates and the Presidency of the twenty-eighth session of the Conference of the Parties in achieving the highest pledges in the Fund’s history, surpassing previous replenishments;
		3.	Welcomes:
			(a)	The increase in the number of funding proposals approved, which brings the total amount approved by the Board to USD 15.9 billion to support the implementation of 286 adaptation and mitigation projects and programmes in 133 developing countries;
			(b)	The increase in the number of entities accredited by the Board, which brings the total number of accredited entities to 139, of which 89 are direct access entities;
			(c)	The increase in the approval of grants for readiness support for national adaptation plans and other adaptation planning processes, bringing the total number of grants approved for readiness support for national adaptation plans and other adaptation planning processes to 115;
			(d)	The adoption by the Board of a policy for results-based payments for activities referred to in paragraph 70 of decision 1/CP.16;
			(e)	The continued collaboration of the Board with the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the Technology Executive Committee;
			(f)	The USD 2.1 billion increase in commitments and addition of 34 new projects to the Green Climate Fund portfolio in 2023, of which USD 917.4 million was committed to 10 new private sector projects (representing 44 per cent of the 2023 programming volume), bringing the total commitments to the private sector portfolio to over USD 5 billion, which had been disbursed to 60 private sector projects and was expected to mobilize an additional USD 17.5 billion, of which USD 1.6 billion in private equity mobilizing five and a half times the Fund’s capital at the fund level and at least an equal amount at the downstream portfolio investment level, with each Green Climate Fund dollar to the private sector in some mitigation sectors expected to mobilize six times the committed capital at the fund level;
			(g)	The Board’s ongoing implementation of the Strategic Plan for the Green Climate Fund 2024–2027, which includes making efforts to enhance access to climate finance for developing countries and accelerating the provision of support to developing countries with a view to maximizing the impact;
			(h)	The ongoing efforts of the Green Climate Fund, in collaboration with the Global Environment Facility, the Adaptation Fund and the Climate Investment Funds, to enhance access to climate finance in line with paragraph 5 below with a view to scaling up successful projects, maximizing their impact and strengthening coherence;
			(i)	The Board’s focus on the accreditation of direct access entities, particularly national and regional entities in underserved countries and regions, in line with the Strategic Plan for the Green Climate Fund 2024–2027;
			(j)	The enhanced efficiency measures of the Green Climate Fund for the approval of readiness grants, including its support for the formulation of national adaptation plans and other adaptation planning processes;
			(k)	The work of the Indigenous Peoples Advisory Group in enhancing support and inclusivity within Green Climate Fund operations, including through improved channels of engagement;
			(l)	The progress of the Green Climate Fund in attracting and mobilizing private sector investment as a means of leveraging and enhancing the impact and reach of climate finance in developing countries;
			(m)	The ongoing efforts of the Green Climate Fund to enhance its regional engagement, including by exploring regional presence in all developing country regions;
		4.	Notes the vision announced by the Executive Director of the Green Climate Fund for the Fund to be able to efficiently manage USD 50 billion in capital by 2030;
		5.	Invites the Board to ensure that efforts to enhance coherence and complementarity do not restrict the access of developing countries to resources or reduce the finance available to them;
		6.	Requests the Board to continue to streamline and simplify access to funding by reducing median times taken during the second replenishment of the Green Climate Fund to process accreditation, readiness, and standard proposal approval process and simplified approval process proposals from review to first disbursement, relative to the first replenishment, with an emphasis on reducing processing time for funding proposals in line with the Strategic Plan for the Green Climate Fund 2024–2027;
		7.	Also requests the Board to continue considering ways to better serve different regions in a geographically balanced manner, including by exploring regional presence in all developing country regions in line with the Governing Instrument for the Green Climate Fund;
		8.	Further requests the Board to consider taking measures to ensure that the monitoring and accountability requirements for procedures after accreditation are fit for purpose and take into account the capacity constraints of direct access entities;
		9.	Invites the Board to consider how to strengthen direct access, including through tailored approaches that address needs and priorities and are consistent with national institutional arrangements and address capacity gaps in consultation with nationally designated authorities;
		10.	Encourages the Board to continue supporting adaptation action, including the implementation of national adaptation plans and the projects, policies and programmes identified therein, in line with the Strategic Plan for the Green Climate Fund 2024–2027;
		11.	Urges the Board to continue strengthening efforts to maintain a balance between funding for mitigation and adaptation in the overall portfolio, as per its Governing Instrument;
		12.	Encourages the Green Climate Fund to continue collaborating with the Climate Technology Centre and Network to enhance access to technology for developing countries, maximize impact and strengthen coherence;
		13.	Invites the Board to consider areas for improvement in the context of the gender-responsiveness of the work of the Green Climate Fund, taking into account relevant insights, including from the report of the 2024 Standing Committee on Finance Forum on accelerating climate action and resilience through gender-responsive climate finance;
		14.	Urges the Board to adopt an updated gender action plan for the second replenishment of the Green Climate Fund, noting the previous plan for 2020–2023, and to actively contribute to the implementation of activities under the UNFCCC gender action plan once the gender action plan has been adopted;
		15.	Also urges the Board to continue incorporating into its decision-making consideration of people and communities on the front line of climate change, including Indigenous Peoples and local communities, in line with the policies of the Green Climate Fund;
		16.	Encourages the Board to support the increased use of alternative financial instruments and structures with a view to increasing public and private finance, in line with the Board’s risk appetite statement, for mitigation and adaptation projects in developing countries in line with the Board’s policy;
		17.	Reiterates its request to the Board to strengthen monitoring and reporting of disbursements for, and impacts arising from, inter alia, multi-country activities on a per-country basis in a manner consistent with the integrated results management framework;
		18.	Decides to modify the arrangements between the Conference of the Parties and the Green Climate Fund, as outlined in the annex, for consideration and approval by the Board before the thirtieth session of the Conference of the Parties (November 2025), thereby making the revised arrangements effective upon the Board’s approval, and ensuring that the subsequent guidance from the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement is provided to the Green Climate Fund annually until their thirty-first (November 2026) and eighth (November 2026) sessions respectively, and biennially thereafter, and also at sessions held in the year immediately preceding the initiation of discussions on new replenishments;
		19.	Confirms that guidance may be provided outside the biennial cycle referred to in the modified arrangements outlined in the annex, upon request by a Party, consistent with rules 9–13 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, as well as at each session preceding the final year of each replenishment of the Green Climate Fund;
		20.	Invites Parties to submit views and recommendations on elements of guidance for the Green Climate Fund via the submission portal no later than 16 weeks prior to the thirtieth session of the Conference of the Parties;
		21.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to take into consideration the submissions referred to in paragraph 20 above in preparing its draft guidance for the Green Climate Fund for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its thirtieth session and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its seventh session (November 2025);
		22.	Also requests the Board of the Fund to include in its annual report to the Conference of the Parties information on the steps it has taken to implement the guidance provided in this decision;
		23.	Takes note of decision 9/CMA.6 and decides to transmit to the Green Climate Fund the guidance from the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement contained in paragraphs 2–8 of that decision.
Annex
	Modifications to the arrangements between the Conference of the Parties and the Green Climate Fund
		Paragraph 3
			For the existing paragraph 3 substitute
			3.	The COP will communicate guidance to the GCF:
				(a)	Annually after each of its sessions, until the end of 2026, and biennially thereafter, after every other session;
				(b)	After each of its sessions immediately preceding the final year of each replenishment of the Green Climate Fund;
				(c)	Where applicable, after any of its sessions not referred to in paragraph 3(a–b) above, should the COP decide to do so.
		Paragraph 16
			For the existing paragraph 16 substitute
			16. 	The COP may request additional information from the Green Climate Fund via its guidance.
			11th plenary meeting
			23 November 2024
		
			
		Decision 4/CP.29
	Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties and guidance to the Global Environment Facility
		The Conference of the Parties
			1.	Notes the report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-ninth session, including the responses of the Global Environment Facility to previous guidance received from the Conference of the Parties, and welcomes the approval by the Council of the Global Environment Facility of several work programmes;
			2.	Invites the Global Environment Facility, in the context of programming for the climate change focal area under its ninth replenishment, to consider, inter alia:
				(a)	Working with developing countries on ways of incorporating just transition elements into national climate plans and programmes;
				(b)	Working with developing countries on establishing nationally determined mechanisms to facilitate coordination of support received;
				(c)	Ways of increasing the contribution of the Global Environment Facility project portfolio to adaptation, as appropriate, in line with its mandate;
				(d)	Supporting the development of pipelines of projects in line with national plans and strategies;
				(e)	Ways of supporting developing countries in their efforts to strengthen institutional capacity and/or arrangements, as appropriate, for climate action, in line with needs and priorities of developing country Parties;
				(f)	Consulting with the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network on technology-related elements of the programming;
				(g)	Continuing to provide technical support for developing country Parties for their preparation of national communications, recognizing that such support is based on technical considerations and should enhance the technical capacity of countries;
			3.	Welcomes the ongoing efforts undertaken by the Global Environment Facility, in collaboration with the Green Climate Fund, the Adaptation Fund and the Climate Investment Funds, with a view to enhancing developing countries’ access to climate finance, scaling up successful projects, maximizing the impact of climate finance and strengthening coherence and invites the Global Environment Facility to ensure that efforts to enhance coherence and complementarity among climate funds do not restrict the access of developing countries to resources or reduce the finance available to them;
			4.	Requests the Global Environment Facility, in administering the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund, to contribute to improving the coherence of and coordination across the funding arrangements for responding to loss and damage in line with decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5;
			5.	Also requests the Global Environment Facility to continue ensuring that its efforts to enhance coherence and complementarity with other climate funds do not result in restricted access to resources by developing countries or reduced availability of finance for them;
			6.	Urges the Global Environment Facility to ensure that a broad range of implementing agencies are engaged in its programming in order to reduce concentration of projects among few implementing agencies and also urges the Global Environment Facility, in the context of its review of the Global Environment Facility partnership, to consider national and regional entities in developing countries in all regions, with a focus on underserved regions, when expanding the number of implementing agencies;
			7.	Further urges the Global Environment Facility to consider ways of strengthening local capacities and country ownership in its provision of support;
			8.	Notes with concern the absence of a pledging session for the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund at this session of the Conference of the Parties owing to the small number of pledges, highlighting the importance of increased support for both Funds, and recalling paragraph 8 of decision 17/CP.27, while acknowledging approval of the largest ever Least Developed Countries Fund and Special Climate Change Fund work programme in fiscal year 2024, with USD 382.32 million allocated to 31 projects and programmes under the Least Developed Countries Fund and USD 24.87 million to 5 projects under the Special Climate Change Fund, totalling USD 407.19 million across 36 projects and programmes;
			9.	Requests the Global Environment Facility to further streamline the processes of the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund to simplify access for eligible countries, as appropriate;
			10.	Welcomes the ongoing collaboration of the Global Environment Facility with the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network and encourages the Global Environment Facility to consider opportunities for scaling up programmes focused on technology and innovation;
			11.	Invites the Global Environment Facility to consider areas for improvement in the context of the gender-responsiveness of its work, taking into account relevant insights, including the summary report of the 2024 Forum of the Standing Committee on Finance on accelerating climate action and resilience through gender-responsive finance;
			12.	Encourages the Global Environment Facility to work to ensure that all its implementing agencies fully comply with its policy on gender equality in implementing climate projects funded by the Global Environment Facility in order to help ensure equal opportunities for women and men in terms of participating in, contributing to and benefiting from activities financed by the Global Environment Facility;
			13.	Also encourages the Global Environment Facility to clearly outline in its work programmes how Indigenous Peoples as well as local communities can meaningfully engage in the development of Global Environment Facility programmes and projects and benefit therefrom;
			14.	Requests the Global Environment Facility, in administering the Least Developed Countries Fund, to continue facilitating the smooth transition of developing countries graduating from least developed country status by continuing to provide approved funding through the Fund until the completion of projects approved by the Least Developed Countries Fund Council prior to those countries’ graduation from least developed country status and also requests the Global Environment Facility to consider developing further measures to help ensure this smooth transition for recently graduated least developed countries;
			15.	Further requests the Global Environment Facility to continue to support the strengthening of institutional arrangements and the building of capacity in developing countries with a view to facilitating improved access to and use of Global Environment Facility resources, facilitating knowledge-sharing and South–South learning on Global Environment Facility projects and exploring areas for further collaboration;
			16.	Decides to modify the memorandum of understanding between the Conference of the Parties and the Global Environment Facility, as outlined in the annex, for consideration and approval by the Council of the Global Environment Facility before the thirtieth session of the Conference of the Parties (November 2025), thereby making the revised memorandum of understanding effective upon the Council’s approval, and ensuring that the subsequent guidance from the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement is provided to the Global Environment Facility annually until their thirty-first (November 2026) and eighth (November 2026) sessions respectively, and biennially thereafter, and also at sessions held in the year immediately preceding the initiation of discussions on new replenishments;
			17.	Confirms that guidance may be provided outside the biennial cycle referred to in the modification to the memorandum of understanding as outlined in the annex, upon request by a Party, consistent with rules 9–13 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, as well as at each session preceding the final year of each replenishment of the Global Environment Facility;
			18.	Invites Parties to submit views and recommendations on elements of guidance for the Global Environment Facility via the submission portal no later than 16 weeks prior to the thirtieth session of the Conference of the Parties;
			19.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to take into consideration the submissions referred to in paragraph 18 above in preparing its draft guidance for the Global Environment Facility for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its thirtieth session and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its seventh session (November 2025);
			20.	Also requests the Global Environment Facility to include in its annual report to the Conference of the Parties information on the steps it has taken to implement the guidance provided in this decision;
			21.	Takes note of decision 10/CMA.6 and decides to transmit to the Global Environment Facility the guidance from the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement contained in paragraphs 2–6 of that decision.
		II.	
Annex
	Modification to the memorandum of understanding between the Conference of the Parties and the Council of the Global Environment Facility
		Paragraph 3
			For the existing paragraph 3 substitute
			3. 	The Conference of the Parties will communicate to the Council of the Global Environment Facility any policy guidance approved by the Conference of the Parties concerning the Financial Mechanism:
			(a)	Annually after each of its sessions, until the end of 2026, and biennially thereafter, after every other session;
			(b)	After each of its sessions immediately preceding the final year of each replenishment of the Global Environment Facility;
			(c)	Where applicable, after any session not referred to in paragraph 3(a–b) above, should the Conference of the Parties decide to do so.
				11th plenary meeting
				23 November 2024

	I.	
	Decision 5/CP.29
	Report of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage and guidance to the Fund
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling decisions 2/CP.27 and 2/CMA.4; and 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5,
		1.	Welcomes the report of the Board of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage for 2024 and the information therein;
		2.	Notes the following information and actions of the Board presented in the report:
			(a)	The selection by the Board of the Philippines as the host country of the Board through an open, transparent and competitive process, and the conclusion of the host country agreement between the Philippines and the Board;
			(b)	The approval by the Board of the draft of the arrangements, as developed by the Standing Committee on Finance, to be concluded between the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board consistently with the Governing Instrument of the Fund;
			(c)	The prompt selection of the Executive Director of the Fund by the Board through a merit-based, open and transparent process;
			(d)	The confirmation by the Board that the conditions set out in paragraph 20 of decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5 can be met during an interim period of four years;
			(e)	The decision of the Board to launch an independent assessment of the performance of the World Bank as host of the Fund’s secretariat no later than at the first meeting of the Board in 2027 and to report on the outcomes thereof to the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement no later than at their thirty-third (November 2028) and tenth (November 2028) sessions respectively;
		3.	Welcomes the rapid progress of the Board in operationalizing the Fund;
		4.	Notes with appreciation the confirmation by the World Bank of its ability and willingness to operationalize the Fund as a World Bank hosted financial intermediary fund for the interim period referred to in paragraph ‎2(d) above, as well as that the World Bank took the steps necessary to promptly operationalize the Fund as a financial intermediary fund; submitted to the Board of the Fund within eight months after the conclusion of the twenty‑eighth session of the Conference of the Parties the relevant financial intermediary fund documentation, approved by the World Bank Board of Directors, including a hosting agreement between the Board of the Fund and the World Bank, based on consultations with and guidance from the Board of the Fund; and established a new, dedicated and independent secretariat hosted by the World Bank to service the Fund;
		5.	Welcomes the confirmation by the Board of the Fund that the conditions set out in paragraph 20 of decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5 can be met by the World Bank during the interim period referred to in paragraph ‎2(d) above, and the signing of the agreements between the Board of the Fund and the World Bank to operationalize the Fund as a World Bank hosted financial intermediary fund;
		6.	Welcomes with appreciation that the Government of the Philippines promptly conferred the Board of the Fund with the legal personality and the legal capacity as necessary for discharging its roles and functions, in particular the legal capacity to negotiate, conclude and enter into a hosting arrangement with the World Bank as interim trustee and host of the Fund’s secretariat;
		7.	Expresses appreciation to the Governments of Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, the Bahamas, Barbados, Eswatini, Kenya and Togo for offering to host the Board of the Fund and to confer it with the necessary legal personality and legal capacity;
		8.	Also expresses appreciation to the secretariats of the UNFCCC and the Green Climate Fund and the United Nations Development Programme for jointly forming the interim secretariat for the Fund and providing support, including administrative support, to the Board of the Fund during the transitional period until the establishment of the independent secretariat and looks forward to a smooth and cost-effective transition of the interim secretariat’s functions under the new, dedicated and independent secretariat;
		9.	Welcomes the financial pledges made to the Fund by the Governments of Australia, Austria, Estonia, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea, New Zealand and Sweden and the government of the Walloon Region of Belgium, which, together with the other pledges mentioned in table 2 of the annex to document FCCC/CP/2024/9–FCCC/PA/CMA/2024/13, amount to the equivalent of USD 731.15 million;
		10.	Notes the importance of converting pledges to contributions in a timely manner, urges the conversion of pledges as soon as possible, and requests the Board to engage with the relevant Parties for the timely conversion of pledges to fully executed contribution agreements or arrangements to increase the predictability of resources for the Fund;
		11.	Expresses gratitude to the Government of Japan for disbursing USD 10 million towards the operationalization of the Fund;
		12.	Expresses appreciation to the Governments of the United Arab Emirates, the Republic of Korea and Azerbaijan for hosting the 1st, 2nd and 3rd meetings respectively of the Board of the Fund;
		13.	Welcomes the prompt selection and appointment of Ibrahima Cheikh Diong as the Executive Director of the Fund through a merit-based, open and transparent process;
		14.	Also welcomes the launch of the annual high-level dialogue on coordination and complementarity at a high-level event, organized by the Presidency of the twenty-ninth session of the Conference of the Parties and the Board of the Fund, held on the margins of the World Leaders Climate Action Summit in conjunction with the twenty-ninth session of the Conference of the Parties and the sixth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
		15.	Further welcomes the adoption by the Board of the Fund of its workplan for 2024–‍2025, which is aimed at implementing the provisions of the Governing Instrument of the Fund with a view to approving funding decisions as soon as possible, developing operational procedures and policies for delivering on the mandate of the Fund, and ensuring appropriate safeguards, and looks forward to the timely implementation of the workplan;
		16.	Notes with appreciation the Board’s timeline in its workplan for preparing a long‑term fundraising and resource mobilization strategy and plan for the Fund by the end of 2025, guided by paragraph 12 of decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5 and paragraphs 54–56 of the Governing Instrument of the Fund;
		17.	Affirms the need to promote efforts that enhance coherence and complementarity of the Fund with new and existing arrangements for responding to loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change and welcomes the inclusion of a target in the workplan of the Board to develop a complementarity and coherence framework in 2025;
		18.	Invites Parties to submit views and recommendations on elements of guidance for the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage via the submission portal no later than 10 weeks prior to the thirtieth session of the Conference of the Parties (November 2025);
		19.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to take into consideration the submissions referred to in paragraph 18 above when preparing its draft guidance for the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its thirtieth session;
		20.	Also requests the Board of the Fund to include in its annual report to the Conference of the Parties information on the steps it has taken to implement the guidance provided in this decision.
		11th plenary meeting
		23 November 2024

	I.	
	Decision 6/CP.29
	Arrangements between the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling Article 11 of the Convention and Article 9, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement,
		Also recalling paragraphs 2–3 of decisions 2/CP.27 and 2/CMA.4; and decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, as well as annex I to those decisions, which sets out the Governing Instrument of the Fund referred to in paragraph 3 of decisions 2/CP.27 and 2/CMA.4,
		Further recalling decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, in which, inter alia, the Fund was designated as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism of the Convention, also serving the Paris Agreement, and the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement were requested to conclude arrangements with the Board of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage to ensure that it is accountable to and functions under the guidance of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Recognizing that, pursuant to paragraph 6 of decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, the arrangements between the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board are to be consistent with decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, and the Governing Instrument of the Fund contained in annex I to those decisions,
		Recalling decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, in which the Standing Committee on Finance was requested to develop the arrangements to be concluded between the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board, consistently with the Governing Instrument of the Fund, for consideration and approval by the Board and subsequent consideration and approval by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-ninth session and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its sixth session,
		Also recalling paragraph 13 of the Governing Instrument of the Fund,
		1.	Welcomes with appreciation the draft arrangements between the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage as contained in the report of the Standing Committee on Finance and approved by the Board;
		2.	Confirms that the arrangements between the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board shall be consistent with the Governing Instrument of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage, contained in annex I to decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5;
		3.	Notes that the Board has approved the arrangements, as transmitted by the Standing Committee on Finance, contained in annex IV to the report of the Board;
		4.	Approves the arrangements between the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board contained in the annex, thereby bringing the arrangements into force subject to the approval of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
		5.	Requests the Board to report on the implementation of the arrangements referred to in paragraph 4 above in its annual reports to the Conference of the Parties, starting at its thirtieth session (November 2025), and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, starting at its seventh session (November 2025).

Annex
	Arrangements between the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage
		Preamble
		Recalling Article 11 of the Convention and Article 9, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement,
		Also recalling paragraphs 2–3 of decisions 2/CP.27 and 2/CMA.4; and decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, as well as annex I to those decisions, which sets out the Governing Instrument of the Fund referred to in paragraph 3 of decisions 2/CP.27 and 2/CMA.4 (hereinafter referred to as the Fund),
		Recognizing that the Fund is designated as an entity entrusted with the operation of the Financial Mechanism of the Convention, also serving the Paris Agreement, which will be accountable to and function under the guidance of the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, as per paragraph 5 of decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5,
		Also recognizing that, pursuant to paragraph 6 of decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, the arrangements between the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board of the Fund are to be consistent with decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5 and the Governing Instrument of the Fund,
		The Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC (COP), the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) and the Board of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage (hereinafter referred to as the “Board” and the “Fund” respectively) hereby agree to the following arrangements:
		I.	Purpose of these arrangements
			1.	The purpose of these arrangements is to set out the working relationship between the COP, the CMA and the Board to ensure that the Fund is accountable to and functions under the guidance of the COP and the CMA, consistently with the Governing Instrument of the Fund, and receives guidance from the COP and the CMA on its policies, programme priorities and eligibility criteria.
		II.	Determination and communication of guidance from the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
			2.	The Board will receive guidance from the COP and the CMA on its policies, programme priorities and eligibility criteria.
			3.	The Board will submit annual reports to the COP and the CMA for their consideration.
			4.	The COP and the CMA will adopt decisions providing guidance to the Board at each of their sessions, unless otherwise decided by the COP and the CMA.
			5.	The COP and the CMA will provide such guidance on the basis of, inter alia, a thorough consideration of the information in the annual reports of the Board.
			6.	The Board may review the periodicity of the guidance from the COP and the CMA and make a recommendation thereon for consideration by the COP and the CMA.
		III.	Conformity with guidance of the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
			7.	The Board will take appropriate action in response to the guidance received from the COP and the CMA and will report on such action in its annual reports.
		IV.	Reconsideration of funding decisions
			8.	These arrangements reaffirm that the Board has responsibility for setting the strategic direction of the Fund and for the Fund’s governance and operational modalities, policies, frameworks and work programme, including relevant funding decisions.
			9.	The COP and the CMA may provide additional guidance to the Board to clarify policies, programme priorities and eligibility criteria as they impact funding decisions.
			10.	Further modalities by which a particular funding decision may be reconsidered, as per Article 11, paragraph 3(b), of the Convention, will be developed by the Board, as appropriate.
		V.	Financial instruments
			11.	In its provision of finance, the Fund will take into account guidance from the COP and the CMA, pursuant to paragraphs 57–59 of the Governing Instrument.
		VI.	Annual reports of the Board to the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
			12.	The Board will include in its annual reports to the COP and the CMA:
				(a)	Information on implementation of policies, programme priorities and eligibility criteria, including information on action taken by the Board in response to guidance provided by the COP and the CMA;
				(b)	A synthesis of the different activities under implementation and a list of the activities approved, as well as a financial report;
				(c)	Information on all activities financed by the Fund;
				(d)	Action taken to develop, operate and review the resource allocation system referred to in paragraphs 60–61 of the Governing Instrument;
				(e)	Any reports of the independent evaluations of the performance of the Fund referred to in paragraphs 64–65 of the Governing Instrument;
				(f)	Information on how it has drawn on expert and technical advice, including from the relevant constituted bodies established under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, as appropriate;
				(g)	Information on the high-level dialogue referred to in paragraph 11 of annex II to decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, as described in paragraph 12 of annex II to those decisions;
				(h)	Information on action taken to enhance coordination and complementarity pursuant to paragraphs 51–53 of the Governing Instrument, as well as recommendations to the COP and the CMA pursuant to paragraph 22(s) of the Governing Instrument.
			13.	The Board is encouraged to include information in its annual reports on how it has established consultative forums to engage and communicate with stakeholders, pursuant to paragraph 28 of the Governing Instrument, and how it has developed and managed mechanisms to promote the input and participation of stakeholders, pursuant to paragraph 29 of the Governing Instrument.
			14.	The COP and the CMA may request the Board to provide additional information in its annual reports.
		VII.	Determination of funding necessary and available
			15.	The Board will include information in its annual reports to the COP and the CMA on its long-term fundraising and resource mobilization strategy, as appropriate.
		VIII.	Periodic review of the Fund
			16.	Pursuant to paragraph 66 of the Governing Instrument, the Fund will be subject to periodic reviews conducted by the COP and the CMA, which will be informed by, inter alia, the results of the independent evaluation of the performance of the Fund referred to in paragraph 64 of the Governing Instrument and the annual reports of the Board to the COP and the CMA.
		IX.	Amendments to the Governing Instrument
			17.	The Board may recommend amendments to the Governing Instrument for consideration by the COP and the CMA.
		X.	Termination of the Fund
			18.	The Board may recommend the termination of the Fund for consideration by the COP and the CMA.
		XI.	Cooperation between the secretariat of the Fund and the UNFCCC secretariat, and representation of the Board in sessions of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
			19.	The secretariat of the Fund may, as necessary and subject to the direction of the Board of the Fund, cooperate and exchange views with the UNFCCC secretariat on matters relevant to the operation of the Financial Mechanism of the Convention and the Paris Agreement, including implementation of these arrangements between the COP, the CMA and the Board, coordination with other international financing channels and funding arrangements, as appropriate, and participation of representatives in sessions of the COP and the CMA.
			20.	The participation of representatives of the UNFCCC secretariat in meetings of the Board, and of the secretariat of the Fund in sessions of the COP and the CMA, is to be governed by the rules of procedure of the Board and the draft rules of procedure of the COP respectively.
		XII.	Final clauses
			21.	These arrangements can only be modified by mutual written consent of the COP, the CMA and the Board.
			22.	These arrangements are effective upon approval by the Board and subsequent approval by the COP and the CMA.
			23.	These arrangements may only be terminated by mutual written consent of the COP, the CMA and the Board.
			11th plenary meeting
			23 November 2024

	I.	
	Decision 7/CP.29
	Gender and climate change
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling decisions 36/CP.7, 1/CP.16, 23/CP.18, 18/CP.20, 1/CP.21, 21/CP.22, 3/CP.23, 3/CP.25, 20/CP.26, 24/CP.27 and 15/CP.28,
		Acknowledging the continuing need for gender mainstreaming through all relevant targets and goals in activities under the Convention as an important contribution to increasing their effectiveness, fairness and sustainability,
		Also acknowledging the important role of the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan in advancing gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls in the UNFCCC process, demonstrated by their review by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation,
		Recognizing with concern that climate change impacts on women and men can often differ owing to historical and current gender inequalities and multidimensional factors and can be more pronounced in developing countries and for local communities and Indigenous Peoples,
		Acknowledging that climate change is a common concern of humankind, Parties should, when taking action to address climate change, respect, promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights, the right to health, the rights of Indigenous Peoples, local communities, migrants, children, persons with disabilities and people in vulnerable situations and the right to development, as well as gender equality, empowerment of women and intergenerational equity,
		Taking into account the imperatives of a just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs in accordance with nationally defined development priorities,
		1.	Takes note of the synthesis report on progress, challenges, gaps and priorities in implementing the gender action plan, and future work to be undertaken on gender and climate change and the summary report on the in-session workshop, held at the sixtieth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, to discuss the synthesis report and recognizes the action taken by Parties, UNFCCC constituted bodies, the secretariat and observers to implement the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan;
		2.	Takes note of the reports on gender composition, according to which gender balance in Party delegations was achieved at the fifty-eighth and sixtieth sessions of the subsidiary bodies, women’s representation in Party delegations to sessions of the governing bodies has remained the same or declined year-on-year since the twenty-fifth sessions of the Conference of the Parties, and progress in achieving the goal of gender balance in constituted bodies remains inconsistent;
		3.	Notes the synthesis report by the secretariat on implementation of gender-responsive climate policies, plans, strategies and action, as reported by Parties in reports and communications under the UNFCCC, and the progress reflected therein;
		4.	Encourages Parties to enhance their efforts to advance the implementation of the decisions referred to in the preamble;
		5.	Acknowledges that capacity-building, knowledge management and the sharing of experience are essential to supporting relevant actors in designing and implementing gender-responsive climate action and for increasing the effectiveness and scaling up of these measures;
		6.	Recognizes that the full, meaningful and equal participation and leadership of women in all aspects of the UNFCCC process and in national- and local-level climate policymaking and action is vital for achieving long-term climate goals and notes the importance of taking further steps in this regard;
		7.	Acknowledges that coherence with relevant United Nations processes, in particular the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as applicable, and within national implementation will contribute to improving the efficiency and effectiveness of efforts to integrate gender considerations into climate action;
		8.	Encourages United Nations entities to cooperate with Parties on mainstreaming gender- and age-disaggregated data in their existing policies, enabling mechanisms and programmes, across all levels of governance, and to support Parties in directly applying the best available science in the collection and analysis of data sets, including on the impacts of extreme weather and slow onset events;
		9.	Invites Parties to include information on efforts and steps taken to implement the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and any subsequent gender action plan in their national reporting under the UNFCCC process, as applicable;
		10.	Notes that gender-responsive implementation and means of implementation of climate policy and action can enable Parties to raise ambition, as well as enhance gender equality, and just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs in accordance with nationally defined development priorities;
		11.	Decides to extend the enhanced Lima work programme on gender for a period of 10 years;
		12.	Also decides that a review of the implementation of the enhanced Lima work programme on gender to identify progress, challenges and further work to be undertaken shall be initiated at the seventieth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (June 2029) with a view to the Subsidiary Body for Implementation concluding the review at its seventy-first session (November 2029) and recommending a draft decision thereon for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its thirty-fourth session (November 2029);
		13.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to initiate the development of a new gender action plan at its sixty-second session (June 2025) taking into account the inputs to and outcome of the review of the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan in 2024 and the workshops referred to in paragraphs 14 and 16 below with a view to recommending a draft decision for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its thirtieth session (November 2025);
		14.	Also requests the Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to organize, with the support of the secretariat, a technical workshop, to be held at the sixty-second session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, to facilitate the design of gender action plan activities, taking into account, inter alia, the progress, challenges, gaps and priorities identified by Parties and observers during the review referred to in paragraph 13 above and the information presented in the synthesis report referred to in paragraph 1 above, with a view to informing the development of the new gender action plan referred to in paragraph 13 above;
		15.	Invites Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal by 31 March 2025 views on the format and scope of the in-session technical workshop referred to in paragraph ‎14 above;
		16.	Decides that other in-person or hybrid technical workshops on the topic referred to in paragraph 14 above may be held during 2025 in conjunction with existing events, such as the regional climate weeks, at the discretion of the Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation upon receiving an expression of interest from a Party to host such a workshop, while aiming to ensure inclusive and balanced geographical representation at the workshops;
		17.	Encourages Parties to appoint and provide support for a national gender and climate change focal point for climate negotiations, implementation and monitoring;
		18.	Requests all constituted bodies to continue to include in their regular reports information on progress towards integrating a gender perspective into their processes;
		19.	Invites relevant public and private entities to increase the gender-responsiveness of climate finance with a view to strengthening the capacity of women;
		20.	Encourages Parties and relevant public and private entities to strengthen the gender-responsiveness of climate finance with a view to further building the capacity of women and for implementation work under the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and any subsequent gender action plan, and in order to facilitate simplified access to climate finance for grass-roots women’s organizations as well as for Indigenous Peoples, especially women, and local communities;
		21.	Emphasizes the urgency of scaled-up support for developing country Parties to implement the Lima work programme on gender and any subsequent gender action plan, consistent with relevant provisions of the Convention;
		22.	Requests the secretariat to continue to:
			(a)	Maintain the position of senior gender focal point to retain relevant expertise and support and monitor the implementation of the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and any subsequent gender action plan;
			(b)	Prepare an annual gender composition report and a biennial synthesis report on progress in integrating a gender perspective into constituted body processes;
			(c)	Provide capacity-building support to constituted bodies and secretariat staff in integrating a gender perspective into their respective areas of work in collaboration with relevant organizations, as appropriate;
			(d)	Facilitate coordination with other United Nations entities, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations when supporting the implementation of the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and any subsequent gender action plan;
			(e)	Facilitate support for building and strengthening the skills and capacities of national gender and climate change focal points;
			(f)	Support the attendance of national gender and climate change focal points at relevant mandated UNFCCC meetings, upon request and subject to the availability of resources;
			(g)	Enhance communication and information-sharing through existing UNFCCC web-based resources and communication activities;
			(h)	Participate in the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women to strengthen the integration of gender considerations within the organization and work of the secretariat;
		23.	Encourages the secretariat to consider making sure all budget proposals have considered effects on gender equality in its own organizational structure, and to appoint gender focal points in relevant departments, provided this does not add to the overall cost but increases efficiency;
		24.	Invites Parties to provide support to developing country Parties for addressing gender-related action under the Convention, including in relation to the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and any subsequent gender action plan;
		25.	Encourages Parties, the secretariat and relevant organizations, in implementing the enhanced Lima work programme on gender, to fully engage men and boys as agents and beneficiaries of change and as strategic partners and allies in achieving gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls in the context of climate change;
		26.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 14, 15, 16, 22 and 23 above;
		27.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		Resumed 11th plenary meeting
		24 November 2024

	I.	
	Decision 8/CP.29
	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts and joint annual report of its Executive Committee and the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change
		The Conference of the Parties
		1.	Endorses decision 16/CMA.6, on the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts and joint annual report of its Executive Committee and the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, which provides as follows:
			“1.	Welcomes the progress of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts in implementing its rolling workplan for 2023–2027 and the progress of the Advisory Board and the interim secretariat of the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change in operationalizing the Santiago network;
			“2.	Adopts the rules of procedure of the Advisory Board of the Santiago network, as contained in the annex;
			“3.	Expresses appreciation to the organizations, constituted bodies under the Convention and the Paris Agreement and other stakeholders that have contributed to the implementation of the rolling workplan of the Executive Committee for 2023–‍2027, including through its thematic expert groups, and to the organizations, bodies, networks and experts that have become or expressed an interest in becoming members of the Santiago network;
			“4.	Requests the subsidiary bodies to continue consideration of the 2024 joint annual report of the Executive Committee and the Santiago network and the 2024 review of the Warsaw International Mechanism at their sixty-second sessions (June 2025) with a view to recommending a draft decision or decisions thereon for consideration and adoption by the governing body or bodies at the session(s) to be held in November 2025;
			“5.	Notes that considerations related to the governance of the Warsaw International Mechanism will continue at its seventh session (November 2025).”
		2.	Notes that considerations related to the governance of the Warsaw International Mechanism will continue at its thirtieth session (November 2025).
	Annex*
	Rules of procedure of the Advisory Board of the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change**
		I.	Scope
			1.	These rules and procedures shall apply to the Advisory Board of the Santiago network (the “Advisory Board”) in accordance with decision 12/CMA.4, endorsed by decision 11/CP.27, and decision 6/CMA.5, endorsed by decision 2/CP.28, as well as any other relevant decisions of the governing body or bodies.
		II.	Definitions
			2.	For the purpose of these rules:
				(a)	“Co-chairs” means the members of the Santiago network elected as co-chairs of the Advisory Board of the Santiago network;
				(b)	“Secretariat” means the secretariat referred to in paragraph 3(a) of decision 12/CMA.4, endorsed by decision 11/CP.27, as a hosted secretariat, and also in the Terms of Reference of the Santiago network, in Annex I of the same decisions.
		III.	Membership
			3.	The Advisory Board, with the aim of achieving fair and balanced representation, shall be composed of the following, taking into account the need for gender balance:
				(a)	Two members from each of the five recognized United Nations regional groups;
				(b)	One member each from the least developed countries and small island developing States;
				(c)	Two members of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism (ExCom), nominated by the ExCom from among its members.
			4.	The Advisory Board will also have three other representatives, one from the Women and Gender constituency, one from Indigenous Peoples organizations, and one from the children and youth non-governmental organizations, who may actively participate in the deliberations of the Advisory Board.
			5.	Members and representatives elected to the Advisory Board shall serve a term of two years and shall be eligible to serve a maximum of two consecutive terms of office.
			6.	Half of the members elected in 2023 shall serve a term of three years and half of the members shall serve a term of two years, after which time the governing body or bodies shall elect half of the members every year for a term of two years.
			7.	The members of the Advisory Board shall remain in office until their successors are elected.
			8.	The term of office of a member shall start at the first meeting of the Advisory Board in the calendar year following their election and shall end immediately before the first meeting of the Advisory Board in the calendar year in which their term ends.
			9.	If a member or representative of the Advisory Board resigns or is otherwise unable to complete their term, the regional group or constituency from which the member comes - or the ExCom, for members nominated by it - may decide, bearing in mind the proximity of the next session of the governing body or bodies, to appoint another member from the same group or constituency to replace said member for the remainder of that member’s term, in which case the appointment shall count as one term.
			10.	If a member is temporarily unable to serve in the Advisory Board, the Advisory Board shall, at the request of that member, invite the group, constituency, or the ExCom, to replace said member in an ad interim capacity for a period of up to one year from the date of that request.
		IV.	Conflicts of interest and confidentiality
			11.	Advisory Board members must promptly disclose and recuse themselves from any deliberations or decision-making where their personal or financial interests may be affected, in order to avoid a conflict of interest or the appearance of one.
			12.	Advisory Board members should not disclose any confidential information they receive in the course of their duties, even after leaving the Advisory Board, except as required by national law.
		V.	Chairing arrangements
			13.	The Advisory Board shall elect annually two co-chairs from among its members to serve for a term of one year.
			14.	If one or both co-chairs are absent from a particular meeting, any other member or members designated by the Advisory Board shall serve as co-chair or co-chairs.
			15.	If a co-chair is unable to complete the term of office, the Advisory Board shall elect a replacement to complete that term of office.
			16.	The co-chairs shall collaborate in chairing meetings of the Advisory Board and related intersessional work. The co-chairs shall, inter alia, declare the opening and closing of meetings, ensure the observance of these rules of procedure, accord the right to speak and announce decisions. The co-chairs shall rule on points of order and, subject to these rules of procedure, shall have complete control over the proceedings of meetings and the maintenance of order at meetings.
			17.	The co-chairs shall share and allocate between themselves responsibility for chairing Advisory Board meetings.
			18.	The co-chairs or any member designated by the Advisory Board shall report to the governing body or bodies on behalf of the Advisory Board.
			19.	The co-chairs or any member designated by the Advisory Board shall represent the Advisory Board in external meetings and shall report back to the Advisory Board on those meetings.
			20.	The co-chairs may also jointly delegate tasks to members of the Advisory Board in the interest of expediting and advancing the work of the Advisory Board.
			21.	The Advisory Board may further define additional roles and responsibilities for the co-chairs.
			22.	The co-chairs, in the exercise of their functions, remain under the authority of the Advisory Board.
		VI.	Subcommittees and panels
			23.	The Advisory Board may establish subcommittees, panels, working groups or task forces, if required, to undertake specific tasks assigned by the Advisory Board or to provide expert advice in order to assist the Advisory Board in executing its work.
			24.	In establishing subcommittees, panels, working groups or task forces, the Advisory Board will determine an appropriate number of participants and ensure that participants have appropriate expertise in the relevant field of work.
		VII.	Secretariat
			25.	The director of the Santiago network secretariat shall serve as secretary to the Advisory Board.
			26.	The secretary shall be responsible for facilitating and providing support to the:
				(a)	Making of the necessary arrangements for the meetings of the Advisory Board, including announcing meetings, issuing invitations and making available the documents for meetings;
				(b)	Maintaining of meeting records and arranging for the storage and preservation of documents of meetings;
				(c)	Making of documents of the meetings of the Advisory Board available to the public, unless otherwise determined by the Advisory Board.
				(d)	Tracking of the implementation of decisions and actions taken by the Advisory Board and report on the progress of these actions.
			27.	In addition, the secretary shall facilitate support that the Advisory Board may require or that the governing body or bodies may direct with respect to the Advisory Board
		VIII.	Meetings
			28.	The Advisory Board shall meet at least twice a year, where possible in connection with meetings of the ExCom, while retaining its flexibility to adjust the number of meetings to suit its needs.
			29.	The Advisory Board shall hold its meetings at the location of the Santiago network secretariat head office, unless otherwise decided by the Advisory Board and subject to the necessary arrangements being made, and may hold meetings in hybrid (in person and virtual) format. Decisions on the location of meetings other than the location of the Santiago network secretariat shall take into account the costs and benefits of venue rotation, particularly in developing countries and with respect to facilitating the participation of key stakeholders, as well as the location of the ExCom meetings.
			30.	The Advisory Board may decide to hold meetings virtually on an exceptional basis and when required to advance its work, as proposed by the co-chairs after consultation with the Advisory Board.
			31.	In arranging virtual meetings, the Advisory Board shall consider the working modalities of such meetings, including the fair and balanced choice of timing in light of the time zones of members, with the aim of ensuring inclusive and effective participation of all members.
			32.	At the first Advisory Board meeting of each calendar year, the co-chairs shall propose a schedule of meetings for that calendar year.
			33.	At each meeting, the Advisory Board will confirm the dates, duration and venue of the following meeting.
			34.	If changes to the scheduled or additional meetings are required, the co-chairs shall, after consultation with the Advisory Board, request the secretariat to give notice of any changes in the dates of scheduled meetings and/or of the dates of additional meetings to members and representatives, and observers. To the extent possible, notice of a meeting shall be given at least four weeks before the opening of that meeting.
		IX.	Quorum
			35.	At least 10 of the Advisory Board members, as laid out in paragraph 3, must be present at a meeting to constitute a quorum. Members participating in meetings virtually will count towards quorum. A quorum shall be established prior to the commencement of each meeting.
			36.	A quorum shall be confirmed by the co-chairs immediately prior to the adoption of any decision by the Advisory Board.
			37.	A member may ask for a confirmation of quorum prior to the commencement of a meeting or prior to the adoption of any decision by the Advisory Board.
		X.	Agenda and documentation for meetings
			38.	The co-chairs, assisted by the secretariat, shall prepare the provisional agenda for each meeting as well as a draft report on the meeting.
			39.	Members and representatives may propose additions or changes to the provisional agenda, in writing, to the secretariat within one week of receiving the provisional agenda, and these additions or changes shall be included in a revised provisional agenda prepared by the secretariat with the approval of the co-chairs.
			40.	The secretariat shall transmit the revised provisional agenda for a meeting to the members and representatives of the Advisory Board at least four weeks prior to that meeting. The revised provisional agenda may be transmitted after that date with the approval of the co-chairs.
			41.	Unless otherwise decided by the co-chairs, documents for a meeting of the Advisory Board should be published on the Santiago network website at least two weeks prior to that meeting, to the extent possible.
			42.	The Advisory Board shall, at the beginning of each meeting, adopt the meeting agenda.
			43.	Before the end of each meeting, the co-chairs shall present draft decisions for consideration and approval by the Advisory Board.
		XI.	Decision-making
			44.	Decisions of the Advisory Board will be taken by consensus by its members as laid out in paragraph 3.
			45.	Efforts by the co-chairs to facilitate the reaching of consensus may include:
				(a)	Consulting with members on draft documents, including draft decisions, prior to the meeting;
				(b)	Consulting with members on the relevant matter during the meeting;
				(c)	Providing the opportunity for members to state and/or formally record in the report on the relevant meeting their reservations regarding a particular decision without preventing consensus from being reached.
				(d)	Postponing the decision on the matter to a later meeting in order to allow for further exchange on the matter;
			46.	If all efforts at reaching consensus have been exhausted, and no consensus is reached, decisions will be taken by a four-fifths majority of the members present and voting.
			47.	The co-chairs, acting together and in good faith, and following consultations with all members, shall determine whether all efforts at reaching consensus in respect of a particular draft decision have been exhausted.
			48.	In making such a determination the co-chairs shall take into consideration:
				(a)	Whether consultations on the relevant matter have occurred during and/or between meetings, including between the co-chairs, without consensus being reached;
				(b)	Whether the subject matter of the draft decision has been considered at prior meetings without consensus being reached;
				(c)	Whether and how many members have indicated that they cannot join consensus on a decision.
			49.	Each member shall have one vote. For the purpose of this rule, “members present and voting” means members participating in the meeting (both in person and virtually) at which voting takes place and casting an affirmative or negative vote. Members abstaining from voting shall be considered as not voting for the purpose of determining the four-fifths majority.
		XII.	Process for intersessional decision making:
			50.	The Advisory Board may take a decision without meeting on an extraordinary basis when, in the judgment of both co-chairs, such a decision should not be postponed to the next Advisory Board meeting. In such a case, the secretariat, with the approval of the co-chairs, shall transmit to Board members a proposed decision with the invitation to approve the decision on a non-objection basis for a prescribed period (generally 21 days but in urgent cases no less than one week). Copies of such a proposal shall be provided to the representatives for their information.
			51.	The provisions on quorum and other rules set forth in these rules of procedure shall apply mutatis mutandis to the aforementioned procedure.
			52.	In the absence of an objection by an Advisory Board member within the prescribed period, the decision will be deemed taken upon the expiration of the prescribed period. If an objection is received within the prescribed period, the co-chairs will work to resolve the concerns of the objecting Board member(s) directly. If the objecting Board member(s) uphold their objection following discussion with the co-chairs, the proposed decision will be considered by the Board at the following Advisory Board meeting. The secretariat shall circulate all written comments and objections to Advisory Board members and representatives and notify all members and representatives of the action taken pursuant to this paragraph.
			53.	Decisions approved between meetings shall be recorded in the report of the following Board meeting.
		XIII.	Use of electronic means of communication
			54.	The Advisory Board may use electronic means of communication to facilitate work and to take decisions in accordance with guidelines to be agreed by the Advisory Board. The secretariat shall ensure that a secure and dedicated web interface is established and maintained to facilitate the work of the Board.
		XIV.	Participation of observers in meetings
			55.	Advisory Board meetings will be open to observers, unless otherwise decided by the Advisory Board, and the Advisory Board will invite observers from relevant constituted bodies, civil society organizations and other organizations, bodies, networks and experts to attend its meetings in order to provide technical expertise and inputs, as appropriate, to the Advisory Board for its deliberations.
			56.	The Advisory Board may decide on additional procedures for the participation of observers.
		XV.	Transparency
			57.	The decisions and products of the Advisory Board shall be made publicly available on the Santiago network website unless decided otherwise by the Advisory Board.
		XVI.	Working language
			58.	English shall be the working language of the Advisory Board.
		XVII.	Modifications to the rules of procedure
			59.	Decisions to propose modifications to these rules of procedure, except with respect to matters decided in decision 12/CMA.4, may be taken by the Advisory Board by consensus with a view to recommending them to the governing body or bodies through the subsidiary bodies for consideration and adoption.
			Resumed 11th plenary meeting
			23 November 2024

	I.	
	Decision 9/CP.29
	Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling decisions 2/CP.14 and 1/CP.27, paragraph 46,
		1.	Welcomes the financial support provided by the Global Environment Facility under the Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer, including for undertaking technology needs assessments, supporting the regional climate technology transfer and finance centres and piloting priority technology projects aimed at scaling up the level of investment in technology transfer;
		2.	Requests the secretariat, under the guidance of the Technology Executive Committee and in consultation with the Global Environment Facility, to prepare a report, for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its sixty-fourth session (June 2026), on the evaluation of the Poznan strategic programme, to take stock of progress, challenges, and successes in and lessons learned from implementing the Poznan strategic programme;
		3.	Also requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to consider the report referred to in paragraph 2 above with a view to recommending a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its thirty-first session (November 2026) with the aim of supporting the implementation of activities, such as those identified and prioritized in developing countries’ nationally determined contributions, national adaptation plans, technology needs assessments, technology action plans and long‑term strategies, and informing the technology implementation programme;
		4.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 2 above;
		5.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		11th plenary meeting
		23 November 2024

	I.	
	Decision 10/CP.29
	Enhancing climate technology development and transfer through the Technology Mechanism
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling decisions 2/CP.17, 1/CP.21, 15/CP.22, 21/CP.22, 15/CP.23, 12/CP.24, 13/CP.24, 14/CP.25, 9/CP.26, 18/CP.27 and 9/CP.28,
		1.	Welcomes with appreciation the efforts of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network in implementing the joint work programme of the Technology Mechanism for 2023–2027 and acknowledges the progress made in executing their respective programmes and plans;
		2.	Welcomes with appreciation the enhanced collaboration and coordination between the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network, including their organization of joint events and systematic exchange of feedback on one another’s work in undertaking activities under their joint work programme for 
2023–2027, and encourages them to continue collaboration to maximize the impacts of their work;
		3.	Decides to conduct a review of the functions and decide whether to extend the term of the Climate Technology Centre at its thirtieth session (November 2025), taking into account the findings of the first and second independent reviews of the effective implementation of the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the findings of the first periodic assessment of the effectiveness and adequacy of the support provided to the bodies of the Technology Mechanism in supporting implementation of the Paris Agreement on matters relating to technology development and transfer;
		4.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to initiate, at its sixty-second session (June 2025), the review referred to in paragraph ‎3 above with a view to recommending a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its thirtieth session;
		5.	Invites the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to participate in the review referred to in paragraph 4 above and to affirm this decision in this regard.
		5th plenary meeting
		18 November 2024
		
		
