Conference of the Parties
	|  | United Nations | FCCC/CP/2023/11/Add.2 |
	|  |  | Distr.: General 15 March 2024  Original: English |
	
Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twenty-eighth session, held in the United Arab Emirates from 30 November to 13 December 2023
	Addendum
	Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty‑eighth session
	Contents
Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties
	Decision	Page
	10/CP.28	Linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism		2
		11/CP.28	Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on capacity-building 
for 2023		5
		12/CP.28	Terms of reference for the second review of the Paris Committee on capactity -building	6
		13/CP.28	Review of the functions, work programme and modalities of the forum on the 
impact of the implementation of response measures, midterm review of the workplan 
and report of the forum		9
	14/CP.28	Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change		17
	15/CP.28	Gender and climate change		18
	16/CP.28	Presidency youth climate champion		19
	17/CP.28	Dates and venues of future sessions		21
	18/CP.28	Administrative, financial and institutional matters		23
	19/CP.28	Administrative, financial and institutional matters		25
	Resolution
	1/CP.28	Expression of gratitude to the Government of the United Arab Emirates		39
	
Decision 10/CP.28
Linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decisions 1/CP.18, paragraph 62, 13/CP.21, 14/CP.22, 14/CP.24 and 9/CP.26, paragraph 21,
		1.	Welcomes the enhanced collaboration between the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the Global Environment Facility and the Green Climate Fund and invites them to continue their collaboration;
		2.	Notes the collaboration with the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism included in the joint work programme of the Technology Mechanism for 2023–2027 and invites the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network to use such collaboration to support technology development and transfer in developing countries with measurable, time-bound and result-oriented actions;
		3.	Welcomes the funding for technology development and transfer provided and mobilized by the Green Climate Fund and the Global Environment Facility in partnership with the Climate Technology Centre and Network;
		4.	Notes with appreciation the information provided by the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism on the linkages and collaboration between them in their reports to the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
		5.	Welcomes the progress of the Climate Technology Centre and Network in preparing project concept notes for submission to the Green Climate Fund Project Preparation Facility to implement larger-scale projects;
		6.	Welcomes with appreciation the launch of the Climate Technology Centre and Network Partnership and Liaison Office in Songdo, Republic of Korea, which will focus on, inter alia, collaboration with the Green Climate Fund and invites the Climate Technology Centre and Network to deliver tangible outcomes from the operation of the Partnership and Liaison Office;
		7.	Welcomes the ongoing work of the Climate Technology Centre and Network as part of its project selected for support under the Challenge Program for Adaptation Innovation of the Global Environment Facility as well as the collaboration of the respective national designated entities and operational focal points in the context of the project;
		8.	Also welcomes the collaboration between the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism on identifying ways to enhance information-sharing and streamline coordination processes among national designated entities, national designated authorities of the Green Climate Fund and operational focal points of the Global Environment Facility and emphasizes the importance of continued coordination among those national focal points;
		9.	Encourages the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network to consider opportunities to support developing countries in accessing funding from the Global Environment Facility and/or the Green Climate Fund for work on climate technology incubators and accelerators, taking into account the specific needs of the least developed countries and small island developing States;
		10.	Invites Parties, the UNFCCC constituted bodies, the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism and other relevant stakeholders to submit via the submission portal by 1 February 2024 views on maintaining and enhancing collaboration and cooperation between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism, including on linkages between the Mechanisms, taking into account the guiding questions contained in the annex;
		11.	Requests the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on the submissions referred to in paragraph ‎‎10 above;
		12.	Also requests the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network, in consultation with the Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, to organize an in-session workshop at the sixtieth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (June 2024) to take stock of the linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism taking into account the views expressed in the submissions referred to in paragraph ‎10 above;
		13.	Further requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to initiate at its sixtieth session discussion on the submissions, synthesis report and workshop referred to in paragraphs ‎‎10, ‎11 and ‎12 above respectively with a view to recommending a draft decision thereon for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-ninth session (November 2024);
		14.	Requests the Technology Executive Committee, in consultation with the Climate Technology Centre and Network, to prepare a summary report on the workshop referred to in paragraph ‎‎12 above for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its sixty-first session (November 2024);
		15.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs ‎‎11, ‎‎12 and ‎‎14 above;
		16.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	5th plenary meeting
	11 December 2023
		

Annex
	Guiding questions for the submission of views on maintaining and enhancing collaboration and cooperation between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism, including linkages between them
		1.	What approaches have been successful in enhancing the linkages? Are these approaches maintained effectively, and what are the lessons learned?
		2.	What are the gaps in the linkages between the two Mechanisms and how could these gaps be addressed in order to maintain and enhance the linkages?
		3.	How can the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism cooperate in engaging with stakeholders in order to maintain and enhance the linkages?
		4.	What is the potential role of stakeholders in enhancing the relationship between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism and how can this be further strengthened?
		5.	What are the means for enhancing communication and cooperation among national designated entities, national designated authorities of the Green Climate Fund and operational focal points of the Global Environment Facility and how can the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism enhance collaboration between their respective focal points?
		6.	To what extent do Parties use the outcomes of the technology needs assessment and technology action plans to access funding from the Global Environment Facility and the Green Climate Fund? How can Parties better utilize the results of events and products of the Technology Executive Committee, technical assistance of the Climate Technology Centre and Network, and outcomes of the technology needs assessment and technology action plans to mobilize funding from the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism?
		7.	How can the linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism be enhanced to better support the implementation of the results of the technical assistance from the Climate Technology Centre and Network, and outcomes of the technology needs assessment and technology action plans?
		5th plenary meeting
			11 December 2023
		
		
	Decision 11/CP.28
	Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building for 2023
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling decisions 2/CP.17, 1/CP.21, 2/CP.22, 16/CP.22, 16/CP.23, 15/CP.24, 8/CP.25, 12/CP.26 and 19/CP.27,
			1.	Welcomes the annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building for 2023 and takes note of the recommendations therein;
			2.	Invites Parties, as appropriate, the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, the constituted bodies under the Convention, United Nations organizations, observers and other stakeholders to consider the recommendations referred to in paragraph ‎1 above and to take any necessary action, as appropriate and in accordance with their mandates;
			3.	Acknowledges the progress of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building in implementing its workplan for 2021–2024, which is based on the priority areas and activities set out in the annex to decision 9/CP.25;
			4.	Invites Parties and relevant institutions, as appropriate, to provide support and resources to the Paris Committee on Capacity-building for implementing its workplan for 2021–2024 in the light of the aim of the Committee established in decision 1/CP.21;
			5.	Notes that capacity gaps and needs still exist in developing countries pertaining to the implementation of the Convention.
		5th plenary meeting
		11 December 2023
			
		
	Decision 12/CP.28
	Terms of reference for the second review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling decisions 1/CP.21, 2/CP.22, 16/CP.22, 16/CP.23, 15/CP.24, 8/CP.25, 9/CP.25, 12/CP.26, 19/CP.27 and 3/CMA.2,
			1.	Reaffirms its decision to conduct the second review of the progress and need for extension of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building;
			2.	Adopts the terms of reference for the second review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, contained in the annex;
			3.	Invites Parties, constituted bodies under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, representatives of relevant processes under the Convention, and non-Party stakeholders to submit via the submission portal by 29 February 2024 views on the second review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building based on the terms of reference contained in the annex for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its sixtieth session (June 2024);
			4.	Requests the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on the submissions referred to in paragraph ‎3 above for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its sixtieth session;
			5.	Also requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, at its sixtieth session, to initiate the second review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, in accordance with the terms of reference, taking into account the submissions referred to in paragraph ‎3 above and the synthesis report referred to in paragraph ‎4 above;
			6.	Further requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to complete its work on the second review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building at its sixty-first session (November 2024) with a view to recommending a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-ninth session (November 2024);
			7.	Invites the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to participate in the second review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building at its sixth session (November 2024);
			8.	Also invites the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to affirm this decision, including the terms of reference contained in the annex.
			
Annex
	Terms of reference for the second review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building
		I.	Mandate
			1.	At its twenty-fifth session, the Conference of the Parties (COP) decided to review, at COP 29 (November 2024), the progress and need for extension of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building (PCCB).
			2.	COP 25 requested the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) to initiate, at SBI 58, the preparation of the terms of reference for the second review of the PCCB with a view to COP 28 agreeing on the final terms of reference.
			3.	COP 28 invited the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) to participate in the second review of the PCCB at CMA 6 (November 2024). At CMA 5, the CMA decided to also conduct the second review of the PCCB, at CMA 6.
			4.	COP 28 and CMA 5 requested SBI 60 (June 2024) to initiate the second review of the PCCB.
		II.	Objective
			5.	The objective of the second review is to assess the progress of the PCCB towards achieving its overall aim set out in decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 71, and affirmed in decision 3/CMA.2, paragraph 3, and in addressing its priority areas and activities set out in decision 9/CP.25, paragraph 9 and annex, and affirmed in decision 3/CMA.2, paragraph 4, as well as the need for its extension.
		III.	Scope
			6.	The review will cover the progress and need for extension of the PCCB.
		IV.	Sources of information
			7.	The review will draw upon, inter alia, the following sources of information:
				(a)	The annual technical progress reports of the PCCB;
				(b)	Relevant decisions of the COP and the CMA related to the PCCB;
				(c)	The submissions referred to in this decision;
				(d)	The synthesis report referred to in this decision;
				(e)	The views expressed by Parties during the review, that is at SBI 60 and SBI 61 (November 2024).
		V.	Approach
			A.	Progress
				8.	First, the progress of the PCCB towards achieving its overall aim and in addressing its priority areas and activities will be assessed taking into consideration the progress of the PCCB in implementing its 2021–2024 workplan.
			B.	Need for extension
				9.	The assessment of the progress of the PCCB will be the basis for determining the need for its extension and, as applicable, any other provisions relevant to the form of the extension.
				5th plenary meeting
				11 December 2023
				
	Decision 13/CP.28
	Review of the functions, work programme and modalities of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures, midterm review of the workplan and report of the forum
		The Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling Article 4 of the Convention,
		Also recalling Article 2 and Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol,
		Reaffirming Article 4, paragraph 15, of the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling decisions 1/CP.21, 7/CP.24, 4/CP.25, 19/CP.26, 20/CP.27, 3/CMP.14, 4/CMP.15, 7/CMP.16, 7/CMP.17, 7/CMA.1, 4/CMA.2, 23/CMA.3 and 23/CMA.4,
		1.	Recall that the functions, work programme and modalities of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures were adopted to address the effects of the implementation of response measures by enhancing cooperation among Parties on understanding the impacts of mitigation actions and the exchange of information, experience and best practices among Parties to raise their resilience to these impacts;
		2.	Also recall that the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures shall support the forum in implementing its work programme;
		3.	Note with appreciation the progress of the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts in supporting the work of the forum;
		4.	Take note of the views expressed by Parties during the review of the functions, work programme and modalities of the forum and the midterm review of the workplan of the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts;
		5.	Adopt the updated functions, work programme and modalities of the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts contained in annex I;
		6.	Request the subsidiary bodies to review the functions, work programme and modalities of the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts every five years, starting at their sixty-ninth sessions (2028), with a view to enhancing the effectiveness of the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts and providing recommendations for consideration by the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
		7.	Decide that the forum shall develop and recommend a five-year workplan in line with the forum’s functions, work programme and modalities, taking into account relevant policy issues of concern to Parties, for consideration and adoption by the subsidiary bodies at their sixty-first sessions (November 2024);
		8.	Request the Katowice Committee on Impacts to propose updates to its rules of procedure for the forum to consider and make recommendations to the subsidiary bodies with a view to the subsidiary bodies providing recommendations for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-ninth session (November 2024), the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its nineteenth session (November 2024) and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its sixth session (November 2024);
		9.	Take note that the forum concluded the midterm review of the workplan of the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts and request the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts to implement the activities arising from the outcomes of the review contained in annex II;
		10.	Welcome the annual report of the Katowice Committee on Impacts for 2023;
		11.	Adopt the recommendations forwarded by the forum contained in sections I–III below, which pertain to activities 2, 8 and 9 of the workplan of the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts;
		12.	Invite Parties, observer organizations and non-Party stakeholders to implement the recommendations contained in sections I–III below, as applicable;
		13.	Request the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts, with the support of the secretariat, to implement the recommendations contained in sections I–III below, as applicable;
		14.	Also request the Katowice Committee on Impacts to report, in its annual report, on progress in implementing the recommendations contained in sections I–III below, as applicable, and those in decisions 20/CP.27, 7/CMP.17 and 23/CMA.4;
		15.	Note with appreciation the technical sessions on implementing activities 7 and 8 of the workplan held at the fifty-ninth sessions of the subsidiary bodies and express gratitude to the experts and Parties that contributed to the work of the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts in 2023;
		16.	Request the secretariat to organize a two-day global dialogue on the impacts of the implementation of response measures in conjunction with intersessional meetings of the Katowice Committee on Impacts in 2024 and 2025, in collaboration with relevant organizations and stakeholders and acknowledging the work that has been carried out by the Katowice Committee on Impacts, noting that such dialogues will be conducted in hybrid format to allow both in-person and virtual participation, and note that the forum, at the sixty-third sessions of the subsidiary bodies (November 2025), will consider further dialogues, as appropriate;
		17.	Request the secretariat to prepare a summary report capturing the discussions held at each of the global dialogues referred to in paragraph ‎16 above;
		18.	Invite Parties, observers and non-Party stakeholders to submit their views on possible topics for the global dialogues in 2024 and 2025 via the submission portal by 15 July in each of those years;
		19.	Request that the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies, taking into consideration the submissions referred to in paragraph ‎18 above, decide on and communicate, no later than four weeks in advance of the global dialogues in 2024 and 2025, the topics to be discussed at each dialogue to be held in that year;
		20.	Express gratitude to the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the International Labour Organization and the United Nations Development Programme for providing in-kind, financial, administrative and substantive support, which contributed to the success of the regional workshop for Asia and the Pacific on activity 3 of the workplan held from 12 to 14 September 2023 in Bangkok;
		21.	Take note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs ‎9, ‎11, ‎13, ‎16 and ‎17 above;
		22.	Request that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources;
		I.	Activity 2 of the workplan
			23.	Encourage Parties to:
				(a)	Consider, when designing their nationally determined contributions and long-term low-emission development strategies, just transition plans or frameworks and design processes for just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs, and to promote policy coherence and consider social dialogue, taking into account national circumstances and priorities;
				(b)	Promote capacity-building to, when designing nationally determined contributions and long-term low-emission development strategies, consider plans, guidelines or frameworks for just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs in their nationally determined contributions and long-term low-emission development strategies;
				(c)	Adopt, as appropriate, in their efforts to diversify their economies, any relevant policies in a manner that promotes sustainable development;
			24.	Also encourage participation of non-Party stakeholders in considering or designing just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs in collaboration with Parties and relevant stakeholders;
			25.	Request the Katowice Committee on Impacts to enhance the understanding of Parties of policies for just transitions and their impacts on various sectors en route to achieving the goals of the Paris Agreement;
		II.	Activity 8 of the workplan
			26.	Encourage Parties to:
				(a)	Provide platforms for collaborative learning among non-Party stakeholders in order to promote economic and social co-benefits;
				(b)	Identify and apply best practices for improving the effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability of non-Party stakeholder engagement;
			27.	Also encourage Parties and non-Party stakeholders to:
				(a)	Promote public–private partnership approaches to climate action to drive scalable and profitable solutions for sustainable development in line with the Paris Agreement temperature goal;
				(b)	Enhance the capacity of their workforces in emerging industries, including through education and workforce training and skilling for jobs in low-emission sectors;
		III.	Activity 9 of the workplan
			28.	Encourage Parties to engage stakeholders, including at the national level, throughout the design and execution of climate policies in order to better understand the impacts of response measures on people in vulnerable situations;
			29.	Request the Katowice Committee on Impacts to undertake further research on measuring the potential and actual impacts of response measures on people in vulnerable situations and encourage Parties to consider the results of such research, as appropriate, in the design of response measures and policies to minimize the negative impacts and maximize the positive impacts of response measures on people in vulnerable situations;
			30.	Also encourage Parties and non-Party stakeholders, through climate action, to promote decent work and quality jobs, paying attention to people in vulnerable situations, in the context of sustainable development and eradication of poverty, taking into account national circumstances.
			
	Annex I
	Functions, work programme and modalities of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures under the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement
		I.	Functions
			1.	The forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures (KCI) shall have the following functions:
				(a)	Provide a platform allowing Parties to share, in an interactive manner, information, experience, case studies, best practices and views, and to facilitate assessment and analysis of the impacts of the implementation of response measures, including the use and development of modelling tools and methodologies, with a view to recommending specific actions;
				(b)	Provide recommendations to the subsidiary bodies on the actions referred to in paragraph 1(a) above for their consideration with a view to the subsidiary bodies recommending those actions, as appropriate, to the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
				(c)	Enhance the capacity of Parties, in particular developing country Parties, to deal with the impacts of the implementation of response measures through the modalities referred to in paragraph ‎6(b) below;
				(d)	Address the effects of the implementation of response measures under the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement by enhancing cooperation among Parties, stakeholders, external organizations, experts and institutions, by enhancing the capacity and the understanding of Parties of the impacts of mitigation actions and by enabling the exchange of information, experience and best practices among Parties to raise their resilience to these impacts;
				(e)	Respond to and take into consideration the relevant outcomes of different processes under the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement;
				(f)	Promote action to minimize the adverse impacts and maximize the positive impacts of the implementation of response measures;
				(g)	Prepare information for the technical assessment component of the global stocktake related to the impacts of the implementation of response measures in line with the process outlined in decision 23/CMA.3, paragraphs 11–12;
				(h)	Regularly update the existing database of tools and methodologies suitable for assessing the impacts of the implementation of response measures, as needed and as appropriate;
				(i)	Share experience and best practices in providing detailed information, to the extent possible, on the assessment of economic and social impacts of response measures as provided for in decision 18/CMA.1, annex, paragraph 90.
		II.	Work programme
			2.	The work programme comprises the following areas of work in order to address the concerns of all Parties, particularly developing country Parties:
				(a)	Economic diversification and transformation;
				(b)	Just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs;
				(c)	Assessing and analysing the impacts of the implementation of response measures;
				(d)	Facilitating and building capacity on the identification, development, customization and use of tools and methodologies to assess the impacts of the implementation of response measures.
		III.	Modalities
			3.	The forum shall meet twice a year in conjunction with the sessions of the subsidiary bodies and will be convened under a joint agenda item of the subsidiary bodies and operate in accordance with the procedures applicable to contact groups.
			4.	The KCI shall support the work of the forum.
			5.	The KCI shall operate in accordance with the following terms of reference:
				(a)	The KCI shall meet two times a year, with the first meeting to be held over two days in conjunction with the sessions of the subsidiary bodies in the first sessional period of the year and the second meeting to be held intersessionally over three days;
				(b)	The KCI shall be composed of:
					(i)	Two members from each of the five United Nations regional groups;
					(ii)	One member from the least developed countries;
					(iii)	One member from the small island developing States;
					(iv)	Two members from relevant intergovernmental organizations;
				(c)	Members shall serve in their expert capacity and should have relevant qualifications and expertise in the technical and socioeconomic fields related to the areas of the work programme;
				(d)	The members referred to in paragraph ‎5(b) above shall be nominated by their respective groups. The Chairs of the subsidiary bodies shall be notified of these appointments;
				(e)	The members referred to in paragraph ‎5(b) above shall serve a term of two years and shall be eligible to serve a maximum of two consecutive terms in office;
				(f)	The KCI shall elect, on a consensus basis, two members from among its members referred to in paragraph ‎5(b) above to serve as Co-Chairs for a term of two years each, taking into account the need to ensure equitable geographical representation;
				(g)	If one of the Co-Chairs is temporarily unable to fulfil the obligations of the office, any other member designated by the KCI shall serve as Co-Chair;
				(h)	Meetings of the KCI shall be open to attendance as observers by all Parties and accredited observer organizations, unless otherwise decided by the KCI;
				(i)	The KCI shall operate on the basis of consensus of its members;
				(j)	Members of the KCI shall prepare an annual report for the forum to consider with a view to making recommendations to the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement.
			6.	The forum and its KCI may use the following modalities, as appropriate and as decided on a case-by-case basis, in order to carry out the work programme of the forum:
				(a)	Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices;
				(b)	Preparing technical papers, national, regional and sector-specific case studies, concrete examples and guidelines;
				(c)	Receiving input from and facilitating collaboration with experts, practitioners and relevant organizations;
				(d)	Organizing workshops.
	
Annex II
	Activities arising from the outcomes of the midterm review of the workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures
		The following are activities arising from the outcomes of the midterm review of the workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures (KCI):
		(a)	Organize the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices, to take place at the sixty-second sessions of the subsidiary bodies (SB) (June 2025), in relation to country case studies pertaining to activity 7 of the workplan, in line with the agreed modalities in the workplan, to be implemented by the forum;
		(b)	Develop a case study in each of the five United Nations regions in accordance with activity 7 of the workplan, to be implemented by the KCI by SB 63 (November 2025);
		(c)	Promote the exchange of experience in relation to national and subnational legislation, action plans, frameworks and other structural factors for just transition and economic diversification and transformation, to be implemented at SB 62 by the forum through the exchange of best practices;
		(d)	Build awareness about the positive and negative impacts associated with low- and zero-emission transport technologies, to be implemented at SB 60 (June 2024) by the forum through the exchange and sharing of experience, best practices and key findings;
		(e)	Facilitate the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices in the assessment of the environmental, social and economic co-benefits of climate change policies and actions informed by the best available science, including the use of existing tools and methodologies, to be implemented at SB 62 by the KCI through concrete examples and input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations, and by the forum through the exchange and sharing of experience, best practices and key findings.
		6th plenary meeting
		13 December 2023
		
	
	Decision 14/CP.28
	Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling decisions 6/CP.1, 6/CP.2, 25/CP.7, 5/CP.13 and 12/CP.20,
		1.	Welcomes the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and expresses appreciation and gratitude to those involved in preparing the reports in the sixth assessment cycle for their excellent work and dedication to continuing their work during the extraordinary circumstances of the pandemic;
		2.	Recognizes that the Sixth Assessment Report represents a more comprehensive and robust assessment of climate change than the Fifth Assessment Report, with an increased scope compared with previous assessment cycles, providing integrated scientific, technical and socioeconomic information;
		3.	Encourages the scientific community to continue expanding the scientific knowledge base on climate change and addressing knowledge gaps with a view to supporting the seventh Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change assessment cycle;
		4.	Also encourages Parties to continue making use of the Sixth Assessment Report to inform their discussions under relevant agenda items;
		5.	Further encourages Parties to continue drawing on the information in the Sixth Assessment Report to inform national climate policies and action plans, as appropriate;
		6.	Invites the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to continue providing relevant information to Parties on the scientific, technical and socioeconomic aspects of climate change and to take into account, in determining its future products and assessment cycles, work under the Convention and the Paris Agreement;
		7.	Encourages Parties to continue supporting the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
		5th plenary meeting
		11 December 2023
			

	Decision 15/CP.28
	Gender and climate change
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling decisions 36/CP.7, 1/CP.16, 23/CP.18, 18/CP.20, 1/CP.21, 21/CP.22, 3/CP.23, 3/CP.25, 20/CP.26 and 24/CP.27, the Paris Agreement and the Katowice climate package,
		Acknowledging the important role of the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan in advancing gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls in the UNFCCC process,
		Noting with appreciation the contributions received from Parties and observers in support of the work undertaken through the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan to date,
			Reiterating that the full, meaningful and equal participation and leadership of women in all aspects of the UNFCCC process and in national- and local-level climate policy and action is vital for achieving long-term climate goals and noting the importance of taking further steps in this regard,
		1.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to initiate the final review of the implementation of the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan at its sixtieth session (June 2024), identifying progress, challenges, gaps and priorities, with a view to concluding the review at its sixty-first session (November 2024);
		2.	Invites Parties, United Nations entities, the UNFCCC constituted bodies and relevant organizations, in accordance with their respective mandates and priorities, to submit via the submission portal by 31 March 2024 their inputs on progress, challenges, gaps and priorities in implementing the gender action plan, categorized by deliverable or output for each activity under the gender action plan, and on future work to be undertaken on gender and climate change, with a view to the submissions informing the review referred to in paragraph ‎1 above‎‎;
		3.	Encourages the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to take into account submissions made after the deadline mentioned in paragraph ‎2 above during discussions at its sixtieth and sixty-first sessions;
		4.	Requests the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on the submissions referred to in paragraph ‎‎2 above in advance of the sixtieth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, to hold at that session a workshop to discuss the synthesis report, with focused regional-level and global-level discussions, and to prepare a summary report reflecting the discussions held at the workshop;
		5.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph ‎4 above;
		6.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		5th plenary meeting
		11 December 2023
		
	
	Decision 16/CP.28
	Presidency youth climate champion
		The Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling decisions 1/CP.26, 18/CP.26, 1/CP.27, 23/CP.27, 17/CMA.1, 22/CMA.3 and 22/CMA.4,
		1.	Reiterate their acknowledgement of the role of children and youth as agents of change in addressing and responding to climate change and recognize the opportunity for future Presidencies of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to enhance the meaningful engagement of youth in the UNFCCC process through strengthened engagement on this matter with Parties and non-Party stakeholders, in particular the official children and youth constituency of the UNFCCC and youth within all other non-governmental organization constituencies of the UNFCCC;
		2.	Note the outcomes of the eighteenth Conference of Youth, organized by the official children and youth constituency of the UNFCCC and held in Dubai in November 2023, which were informed by local and regional conferences of youth;
			3.	Welcome the appointment by the Presidency of the twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the Parties and the fourth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement of the first youth envoy of a Presidency of the Conference of the Parties;
		4.	Also welcome the initiative of the Presidency of the twenty-eighth session of the Conference of the Parties and the fifth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement in appointing a youth climate champion, who has furthered the meaningful engagement of children and youth in climate action, including within the UNFCCC process;
		5.	Recognize the initiative of the Presidency of the twenty-eighth session of the Conference of the Parties and the fifth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement in supporting youth-led engagement, including by co-organizing the children and youth pavilion, the Dubai youth climate dialogue and the international Indigenous youth forum on climate change, held at the same sessions;
		6.	Decide that a youth climate champion between the ages of 18 and 35 will be appointed to act on behalf of the Presidency of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to facilitate the enhancement of the meaningful, inclusive engagement of youth in climate action, including within the UNFCCC process;
		7.	Request each incoming Presidency of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to confirm its appointee for Presidency youth climate champion for a term of up to two years, with the outgoing Presidency youth climate champion using the second year of the term to support the champion appointed by the incoming Presidency;
		8.	Also request each incoming Presidency of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to provide direction to the Presidency youth climate champion, with advice from the secretariat, including guidance on avoiding duplication with the work and activities of the official children and youth constituency of the UNFCCC, while respecting the independent role of the constituency and supporting the implementation of decisions of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement on matters related to children and youth in the UNFCCC process, including in relation to the matters referred to in paragraphs ‎10–‎12 below;
		9.	Further request the secretariat to provide support, as appropriate, to each Presidency youth climate champion, in partnership with interested United Nations entities and in alignment with decisions of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, on matters related to children and youth in the UNFCCC process;
		10.	Urge the Presidency youth climate champion to facilitate the meaningful engagement of children and youth in climate action, including within the UNFCCC process, including by supporting, where relevant and as appropriate, the implementation of activities under the work programmes of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Global Climate Action Agenda, engaging in local and regional conferences of youth and engaging with youth within all non‑governmental organization constituencies of the UNFCCC and youth who are part of national delegations to United Nations climate change conferences;
		11.	Encourage the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies and the Chairs of the UNFCCC constituted bodies to invite the Presidency youth climate champion, whose role is to facilitate the meaningful engagement of children and youth in climate action, including within the UNFCCC process, to attend the sessions and meetings of those bodies, as appropriate;
		12.	Also encourage all Parties and non-Party stakeholders to invite the Presidency youth climate champion, whose role is to facilitate the meaningful engagement of children and youth in climate action, including within the UNFCCC process, to attend events that they are hosting at the local, regional, national and international level, including events held during regional climate weeks and as part of multilateral forums;
		13.	Note that this decision does not set a precedent for matters pertaining to future champions or other issues and emphasize that any future proposals will be considered on a case-by-case basis;
		14.	Take note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs ‎8–‎9 above;
		15.	Request that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of supplementary resources and invite other sources of funding to provide support for the activities referred to in paragraphs ‎8–‎9 above.
		6th plenary meeting
		13 December 2023
		
		
	Decision 17/CP.28
	Dates and venues of future sessions
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling Article 7, paragraph 4, of the Convention,
		Also recalling United Nations General Assembly resolution 40/243 of 18 December 1985 on the pattern of conferences,
		Further recalling rule 22, paragraph 1, of the draft rules of procedure being applied regarding the rotation of the office of President among the five United Nations regional groups,
		I.	2024
			1.	Accepts with appreciation the offer of the Government of Azerbaijan to host the twenty-ninth session of the Conference of the Parties, the nineteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the sixth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement from Monday, 11 November, to Friday, 22 November 2024;
			2.	Requests the Executive Secretary to initiate consultations with the Government of Azerbaijan and to conclude a Host Country Agreement for convening the sessions, pursuant to United Nations General Assembly resolution 40/243 and the provisions of United Nations administrative instruction ST/AI/342, including its annex, containing the model conference agreement, with a view to signing the Host Country Agreement as soon as possible, preferably before the sixtieth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (June 2024), so as to allow for its prompt implementation;
			3.	Also requests the Executive Secretary to provide the host country with technical support and guidance on UNFCCC policies and requirements, taking into account any issues raised by Parties regarding the organization of sessions, and to report back regularly to the Bureau of the governing bodies;
		II.	2025
			4.	Accepts with appreciation the offer of the Government of Brazil to host the thirtieth session of the Conference of the Parties, the twentieth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the seventh session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement from Monday, 10 November, to Friday, 21 November 2025;
			5.	Requests the Executive Secretary to initiate consultations with the Government of Brazil and to conclude a Host Country Agreement for convening the sessions, pursuant to United Nations General Assembly resolution 40/243 and the provisions of United Nations administrative instruction ST/AI/342, including its annex, containing the model conference agreement, with a view to signing the Host Country Agreement as soon as possible, preferably before the sixtieth sessions of the subsidiary bodies, so as to allow for its prompt implementation;
			6.	Also requests the Executive Secretary to provide the host country with technical support and guidance on UNFCCC policies and requirements, taking into account any issues raised by Parties regarding the organization of sessions, and to report back regularly to the Bureau of the governing bodies;
		III.	2026
			7.	Notes that, in keeping with the principle of rotation among the United Nations regional groups, the President of the thirty-first session of the Conference of the Parties, the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the eighth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement would come from the Western European and other States;
			8.	Invites Parties to come forward with offers to host the sessions referred to in paragraph ‎7 above, which will be held from Monday, 9 November, to Friday, 20 November 2026, noting the logistical and financial risks associated with delays in selecting a host country and the need for the secretariat to conduct fact-finding missions to the host country in a timely manner;
			9.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, at its sixtieth session, to consider the issue of the host of the sessions referred to in paragraph ‎7 above and to recommend a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-ninth session;
		IV.	Calendar of meetings of the Convention, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement bodies
			10.	Adopts the following dates for the sessional periods in 2026:
				(a)	First sessional period: Monday, 8 June, to Thursday, 18 June;
				(b)	Second sessional period: Monday, 9 November, to Friday, 20 November;
			11.	Also adopts the following dates for the sessional periods in 2027:
				(a)	First sessional period: Monday, 7 June, to Thursday, 17 June;
				(b)	Second sessional period: Monday, 8 November, to Friday, 19 November.
				6th plenary meeting
				13 December 2023
			
	
	Decision 18/CP.28
	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling the UNFCCC financial procedures,
		Having considered the information contained in the documents on administrative, financial and institutional matters prepared by the secretariat,
		I.	Audit report and financial statements for 2022
			1.	Takes note of the financial report and audited financial statements for 2022 and the report of the United Nations Board of Auditors, which include recommendations, and the comments of the secretariat thereon;
			2.	Expresses appreciation to the United Nations for arranging the audit of the accounts of the Convention;
			3.	Also expresses appreciation to the auditors for their valuable observations and recommendations;
			4.	Expresses concern about the high number of recommendations of the United Nations Board of Auditors not yet implemented by the secretariat;
			5.	Urges the Executive Secretary to implement the recommendations of the auditors, as appropriate, and to update Parties on progress;
		II.	Other financial and budgetary matters
			6.	Takes note of the information contained in the note providing an update reflecting adjustments to the work programme of the secretariat for the biennium 2022–2023;
			7.	Also takes note of the information contained in the note on important changes to the secretariat’s administrative issuances;
			8.	Further takes note of the information relating to the trust funds administered by the secretariat contained in the note on the status of contributions and fees as at 9 November 2023;
			9.	Expresses appreciation to Parties that made contributions to the core budget in a timely manner;
			10.	Expresses concern regarding the high level of outstanding contributions to the core budget for the current and previous bienniums, which has resulted in difficulties with both cash flow and the effective implementation of activities;
			11.	Strongly urges Parties that have not made contributions in full to the core budget for the current and/or previous bienniums to do so without further delay;
			12.	Expresses appreciation for the contributions to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process and to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities received from Parties, including those contributions that allow for greater flexibility in allocation;
			13.	Urges Parties to further contribute to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process in order to ensure the widest possible participation in the process in 2024–2025 and to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities in order to ensure a high level of implementation of the work programme of the secretariat;
			14.	Reiterates its appreciation to the Government of Germany for its annual voluntary contribution to the core budget of EUR 766,938 and its special contribution of EUR 1,789,522 as Host Government of the secretariat;
			15.	Requests the Executive Secretary to take further measures to reduce Parties’ outstanding contributions.
			5th plenary meeting
			11 December 2023
				
	
	Decision 19/CP.28
	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling the UNFCCC financial procedures,
		Also recalling paragraph 5 of the UNFCCC financial procedures,
		Further recalling Article 8, paragraph 2(f), of the Convention,
		Recalling Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement,
		Having considered the information contained in the documents prepared by the secretariat on administrative, financial and institutional matters for this session,
		Noting with appreciation the methodology applied by the secretariat in developing the programme budget for the biennium 2024–2025, including the early engagement with Parties,
		I.	Programme budget for the biennium 2024–2025
			1.	Approves the programme budget for the biennium 2024–2025, amounting to EUR 74,105,511, for the purposes specified in table 1;
			2.	Requests the secretariat, in implementing its work programme for the biennium 2024–‍2025 based on the budget approved in paragraph ‎1 above, to seek to allocate adequate resources to constituted bodies in support of their response to the mandates from the governing bodies and to the full delivery of their work programmes, to transparency including the enhanced transparency framework and to adaptation-related activities while continuing to apply the established budget methodology, including to any new mandate;
			3.	Underscores that in implementing the work programme for the biennium 2024–2025 the functions of the secretariat relating to Parties and non-Party stakeholders are distinct and should not be co-mingled and confirms that the new activities for the biennium relating to non-Party stakeholders pursuant to paragraph 93 of decision 1/CMA.4 should focus on enhancements to the global climate action portal in close collaboration with Parties and non‑Party stakeholders;
			4.	Requests that the secretariat’s engagement and collaboration with non-Party stakeholders, including through the Marrakech Partnership for Global Climate Action, shall be funded through supplementary budget resources and partnerships and that these additional activities have no impact on Party-driven mandates;
			5.	Reaffirms that activities included in the core budget are to be based on decisions taken by Parties;
			6.	Notes that the secretariat is committed to updating its partnership policy with a view to ensuring its inclusivity and the wide geographical distribution of future partnerships;
			7.	Notes with appreciation the annual contribution of EUR 766,938 of the Host Government to the core budget;
			8.	Approves the staffing table (see table 2) for the programme budget;
			9.	Notes that the programme budget contains elements relating to the Convention and the Paris Agreement as well as to the Kyoto Protocol;
			10.	Adopts the indicative scale of contributions contained in the annex;
			11.	Notes that the indicative scale of contributions covers 92 per cent of the contributions specified in table 1;
			12.	Invites the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, at its eighteenth session, to endorse the elements of the recommended budget as it applies to the Kyoto Protocol;
			13.	Also invites the United Nations General Assembly to decide, at its seventy-ninth session, on the issue of meeting the conference services expenses from its regular budget as a continuation of existing practice;
			14.	Approves a contingency budget for conference services, amounting to EUR 9,325,679, to be added to the programme budget for the biennium 2024–2025 in the event that the United Nations General Assembly decides not to provide resources for these activities in the United Nations regular budget (see table 3);
			15.	Requests the Executive Secretary to report to the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on the implementation of matters referred to in paragraphs ‎13–‎14 above, as necessary;
			16.	Authorizes the Executive Secretary to make transfers between each of the appropriation lines set out in table 1, up to an aggregate limit of 15 per cent of total estimated expenditure for those appropriation lines, provided that a further limitation of up to –25 per cent of each such appropriation line shall apply, while ensuring no negative impacts on the activities under each division;
			17.	Decides to maintain the level of the working capital reserve at 8.3 per cent of the estimated expenditure;
			18.	Urges Parties that have not made contributions in full to the core budget for the current and/or previous bienniums to do so without further delay;
			19.	Invites all Parties to the Convention to note that each Party shall, prior to 1 January of each year, inform the secretariat of the contribution it intends to make that year and of the projected timing of that contribution in accordance with paragraph 8(a) of the UNFCCC financial procedures, and that contributions to the core budget are due on 1 January of each year in accordance with paragraph 8(b) of the financial procedures, and to pay promptly and in full, for each of 2024 and 2025, the contributions required to finance the expenditures approved in paragraph ‎1 above and any contributions required to finance the expenditures arising from the decision referred to in paragraph ‎14 above on the contingency budget;
			20.	Takes note of the funding estimates of EUR 13.5 million for the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process specified by the Executive Secretary for the biennium 2024–2025;
			21.	Invites Parties to make contributions to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process;
			22.	Takes note of the funding estimate of EUR 152.3 million for the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities specified by the Executive Secretary for the biennium 2024–2025 (see tables 4 and 5);
			23.	Invites Parties to make contributions to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities with a view to enabling the implementation of activities envisaged under the Fund;
			24.	Requests the Executive Secretary to propose to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-ninth session (November 2024) any adjustments that might be needed to the programme budget for the biennium 2024–2025 and to support any such proposal with a report on income and budget performance for the period 1 January to 30 June 2024;
			25.	Also requests, recalling paragraph 22 of decision 22/CP.21 and paragraph 20 of decision 21/CP.23, in which the Executive Secretary was requested to include a zero nominal growth scenario in the same format and at the same level of detail as any other scenario, the secretariat to present zero real growth and actual needs scenarios in future biennium budget proposals;
			26.	Further requests, recalling paragraph 33 of document FCCC/SBI/2023/2, the secretariat to actively engage with Parties in developing future biennium budget proposals;
			27.	Decides that Parties will seek to approve future core budgets that include all category 1 (essential) and 2 (long-term, recurring) activities that have been mandated by the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
			28.	Requests the Executive Secretary to exhibit further transparency in preparing and implementing the budget by undertaking enhanced consultations with Parties and increasing responsiveness of the secretariat to mandates in preparing budget proposals for each biennium;
			29.	Underscores the accountability of the secretariat to Parties and to mandates and reiterates that activities in the core and supplementary budgets must respond accurately and effectively to mandates from Parties;
			Table 1
			2024–2025 core budget by appropriation line
(Euros)
			|  | 2024 | 2025 | 2024–2025 |
			| A. Appropriations |  |  |  |
			| Executive | 2 268 253 | 2 268 253 | 4 536 506 |
			| Programmes | 17 581 308 | 17 751 308 | 35 332 615 |
			| Programmes Coordination | 355 332 | 355 332 | 710 664 |
			| Adaptation | 3 819 153 | 3 819 153 | 7 638 306 |
			| Mitigation | 2 195 438 | 2 195 438 | 4 390 876 |
			| Means of Implementation | 3 629 286 | 3 799 286 | 7 428 571 |
			| Transparency | 7 582 099 | 7 582 099 | 15 164 198 |
			| Operations | 7 791 907 | 7 642 451 | 15 434 359 |
			| Operations Coordination | 789 167 | 789 167 | 1 578 334 |
			| Secretariat-wide costsa | 1 793 946 | 1 793 946 | 3 587 892 |
			| Administrative Services, Human Resources, and Information and Communication Technologyb | 2 227 701 | 2 227 701 | 4 455 402 |
			| Conference Affairs | 1 525 865 | 1 525 865 | 3 051 731 |
			| Legal Affairs | 1 455 228 | 1 305 772 | 2 761 000 |
			| Cross-cutting | 4 893 554 | 4 893 554 | 9 787 108 |
			| Intergovernmental Support and Collective Progress | 2 479 003 | 2 479 003 | 4 958 006 |
			| Communications and Engagement | 2 414 551 | 2 414 551 | 4 829 102 |
			| Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Changec | 244 755 | 244 755 | 489 510 |
			| Total appropriations | 32 779 777 | 32 800 321 | 65 580 098 |
			| B. Programme support costsd | 4 261 371 | 4 264 042 | 8 525 413 |
			| Total budget | 37 041 148 | 37 064 363 | 74 105 511 |
			| C. Adjustment to working capital reservee | 487 000 | 1 927 | 488 927 |
			| Required contributions (A+B+C) | 37 528 148 | 37 066 289 | 74 594 438 |
			| Income |  |  |  |
			| Contribution from the Host Government | 766 938 | 766 938 | 1 533 876 |
			| Contributions from all Parties | 36 761 210 | 36 299 351 | 73 060 562 |
			| Total income | 37 528 148 | 37 066 289 | 74 594 438 |
			
				a  Secretariat-wide costs are pooled costs of staff and facilities managed by Administrative Services and Human Resources on behalf of all divisions.
				b  Administrative Services and Human Resources are funded from programme support costs (overhead), and Information and Communication Technology is funded from the core budget, the supplementary budget and cost recovery.
				c  Provision for an annual grant to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
				d  Standard 13 per cent applied for administrative support.
				e  In accordance with the UNFCCC financial procedures, the core budget is required to maintain a working capital reserve of 8.3 per cent (one month of operating requirements). The working capital reserve amounts to EUR 3.1 million in 2024 and 2025.
				Table 2
				Secretariat-wide staffing funded from the core budget for 2024–2025
			| Grade of post | 2023 | 2024 | 2025 |
			| Professional category and above |  |  |  |
			| USG | 1 | 1 | 1 |
			| ASG | 1 | 1 | 1 |
			| D-2 | 2 | 2 | 2 |
			| D-1 | 8 | 8 | 8 |
			| P-5 | 18 | 18 | 18 |
			| P-4 | 35 | 35 | 35 |
			| P-3 | 44 | 44 | 44 |
			| P-2 | 19 | 19 | 19 |
			| Subtotal Professional category and above | 128 | 128 | 128 |
			| Subtotal General Service category | 53 | 53 | 53 |
			| Total | 181 | 181 | 181 |
			
				Abbreviations: ASG = Assistant Secretary-General; D = Director; P = Professional; USG = Under- Secretary-General.
				Table 3
			Resource requirements for the conference services contingency for 2024–2025
				(Euros)
				| Object of expenditure | 2024 | 2025 | Total 2024–2025 |
				| Interpretation | 1 327 918 | 1 367 755 | 2 695 673 |
				| Documentation |  |  |  |
				| Translation | 1 247 963 | 1 285 402 | 2 533 365 |
				| Reproduction and distribution | 1 226 687 | 1 263 488 | 2 490 175 |
				| Meetings services support | 98 568 | 101 525 | 200 092 |
				| Subtotal | 3 901 136 | 4 018 170 | 7 919 305 |
				| Overhead charge | 507 148 | 522 362 | 1 029 510 |
				| Working capital reserve | 365 888 | 10 977a | 376 864 |
				| Total | 4 774 172 | 4 551 509 | 9 325 679 |
				
					
				Table 4
			Overview of projects and funding requirements from the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities for 2024–2025 (long–term, recurring activities (category 2) and temporary or short–term activities (category 3))
				[English only]
				| Project number | Division | Project/subproject | Resource requirements for 2024–2025 |
				|  |  |  | EURa | Professional level staff | General Service level staff |
				| 101 |  | Intergovernmental engagement | 8 528 941 | 11.2 | 4.0 |
				| 101-001 | Adaptation | Support for the Santiago network for loss and damage | 553 193 | 0.2 | – |
				| 101-002 | Mitigation | Catalysation of mitigation implementation through the high-level ministerial round table on pre-2030 ambition and the work programme for urgently scaling up mitigation ambition and implementation referred to in paragraph 27 of decision 1/CMA.3, and continued support for the implementation of nationally determined contributions and long-term low-emission development strategies | 1 633 754 | 2.0 | – |
				| 101-005 | Intergovernmental Support and Collective Progress | Enhancement of coordination and operational support for Presidency teams | 2 150 184 | 3.0 | 2.0 |
				| 101-006 | Communications and Engagement | Facilitation of the effective participation of observer organizations and other non-Party stakeholders in established UNFCCC processes | 957 849 | 1.0 | 1.0 |
				| 101-010 | Executive | Engagement by the Executive Secretary and Deputy Executive Secretary in United Nations wide management and coordination activities | 117 192 | – | – |
				| 101-011 | Programmes Coordination | Enhancement of coordination and synergies in facilitating implementation of climate action | 1 585 832 | 3.0 | – |
				| 101-012 | Operations Coordination | Support for partnerships for transformative climate action | 1 530 936 | 2.0 | 1.0 |
				| 102 |  | Intergovernmental processes | 48 737 477 | 50.8 | 19.9 |
				| 102-001 | Adaptation | Enhancement of support for established work programmes, including the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans and adaptation-related transparency provisions | 3 210 354 | 2.8 | 0.5 |
				| 102-002 | Mitigation | Support for the operationalization of Article 6, paragraphs 2 and 8, of the Paris Agreement and the implementation of response measures | 10 205 171 | 9.0 | 3.0 |
				| 102-003 | Means of Implementation | Enhancement of support, engagement and outreach in support of the development of the biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows, including in relation to Article 2, paragraph 1(c), of the Paris Agreement, determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement, and the new collective quantified goal on climate finance | 6 501 215 | 4.0 | 2.0 |
				| 102-004 | Transparency | Comprehensive support for the technical reviews of national reports under the enhanced transparency framework and measurement, reporting and verification processes | 21 094 989 | 26.0 | 9.4 |
				| 102-005 | Intergovernmental Support and Collective Progress | Comprehensive support for the response to the first global stocktake, preparation for the second global stocktake, consideration of research and systematic observation, science, enhanced collaboration with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and enhanced ocean-based climate action | 2 590 556 | 3.0 | 1.0 |
				| 102-006 | Communications and Engagement | Mobilization of non-Party stakeholders, including developing climate action events at sessions of the governing bodies and other impactful platforms | 970 643 | 1.0 | 1.0 |
				| 102-006 | Communications and Engagement | Comprehensive support for work related to Action for Climate Empowerment, including enhancing inclusive stakeholder engagement | 928 060 | 1.5 | – |
				| 102-006 | Communications and Engagement | Comprehensive support for work related to gender, including enhancing inclusive stakeholder engagement | 1 262 600 | 1.5 | 1.0 |
				| 102-008 | Conference Affairs | Organization and facilitation of future sessions of the governing bodies | 1 915 213 | 2.0 | 2.0 |
				| 200 |  | Constituted bodies | 13 569 024 | 11.2 | 4.9 |
				| 200-001 | Adaptation | Support for the full extent of activities envisaged in the workplans of the Adaptation Committee, the Facilitative Working Group of the Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform, the Least Developed Countries Expert Group and the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts | 5 831 720 | 3.4 | 1.8 |
				| 200-002 | Mitigation | Support to the operationalization of Articles 6.2 and 6.8 of the Paris Agreement and the implementation of Response Measures | 328 249 | 1.0 | – |
				| 200-003 | Means of Implementation | Support for the full extent of activities envisaged in the workplans of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, the Standing Committee on Finance and the Technology Executive Committee | 2 604 861 | 3.8 | 1.0 |
				| 200-004 | Transparency | Extensive support to developing countries to implement measurement, reporting and verification and the enhanced transparency framework, including through the work of the Consultative Group of Experts | 3 573 889 | 1.5 | 1.1 |
				| 200-007 | Legal Affairs | Comprehensive support for the full extent of activities of the compliance committees under the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement | 1 230 304 | 1.5 | 1.0 |
				| 300 |  | Data and information management | 19 687 255 | 11.3 | 3.2 |
				| 300-001 | Adaptation | Development and enhancement of adaptation-related data portals | 1 013 851 | 1.6 | 0.7 |
				| 300-003 | Means of Implementation | Support for the full extent of activities envisaged in the workplans of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, the Standing Committee on Finance and the Technology Executive Committee | 80 959 | 0.2 | – |
				| 300-004 | Transparency | Development of the information hub and related reporting and review systems and tools used under the enhanced transparency framework and streamlining of existing data management and tools used under the current transparency arrangements | 10 816 604 | 2.5 | 1.5 |
				| 300-006 | Communications and Engagement | Enhancement of digital communication capabilities for effective engagement with Parties, non-Party stakeholders and the public | 2 976 140 | 6.0 | 1.0 |
				| 300-012 | Operations Coordination | Enhancement of digital access to UNFCCC archives | 1 787 781 | – | – |
				| 300-012 | Operations Coordination | Development and maintenance of the Digital Platform for Climate Change Events | 3 011 920 | 1.0 | – |
				| 400 |  | Enhanced engagement | 5 893 760 | 8.0 | 2.0 |
				| 400-001 | Adaptation | Enhanced engagement with respect to climate change impacts, vulnerability and adaptation | 328 249 | 1.0 | – |
				| 400-004 | Transparency | Additional support and enhanced engagement for the development and implementation of the enhanced transparency framework | 3 872 093 | 3.0 | 2.0 |
				| 400-006 | Communications and Engagement | Comprehensive support for communications campaigns for promoting achievements in the UNFCCC process and multilingual content for the UNFCCC website, mobile application and social media | 1 693 418 | 4.0 | – |
				| 500 |  | Oversight and management | 3 720 998 | 5.5 | 1.0 |
				| 500-004 | Transparency | Extensive support to developing countries to implement MRV and ETF, including through the work of the CGE | 548 520 | 1.0 | – |
				| 500-007 | Legal Affairs | Enhancing the capacity of young negotiators, presiding officers, UNFCCC secretariat staff, observer organizations, policymakers and legislators to actively engage in the UNFCCC process and implement international climate commitments | 164 125 | 0.5 | – |
				| 500-007 | Legal Affairs | Comprehensive provision of institutional and general legal review and advice with respect to all activities and operations of the secretariat | 1 092 480 | 2.0 | – |
				| 500-010 | Executive | Fostering an agile, inclusive and diverse UNFCCC Secretariat | 400 201 | 1.0 | – |
				| 500-012 | Operations Coordination | Integration and harmonization of the UNFCCC administrative process to adapt to new mandates that transition from negotiations of the Paris Agreement rule book to operationalization of the Paris Agreement, and continuation of the implementation of recommendations from the structural review of the secretariat to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the organization | 1 515 673 | 1.0 | 1.0 |
				| Total (including programme support costs) | 100 137 455 | 98.0 | 35.0 |
				
				
				
					a  Gross requirements, excluding any unspent balances that may be available at the beginning of the biennium.
				Table 5
			Overview of projects and funding requirements from the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities for 2024–2025 (complementary activities beneficial to achieving the objectives and goals of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement (category 4))
				[English only]
				| Project number | Division | Project/subproject | Resource requirements for 2024–2025 |
				|  |  |  | EURa | Professional level staff | General Service level staff |
				| 101 |  | Intergovernmental engagement | 5 547 771 | 6.5 | 1.0 |
				| 101-002 | Mitigation | Catalysation of mitigation implementation through the high-level ministerial round table on pre-2030 ambition and the work programme for urgently scaling up mitigation ambition and implementation referred to in paragraph 27 of decision 1/CMA.3, and continued support for the implementation of nationally determined contributions and long-term low-emission development strategies | 3 608 045 | 2.5 | – |
				| 101-006 | Communications and Engagement | Facilitation of the effective participation of observer organizations and other non-Party stakeholders in established UNFCCC processes | 1 939 726 | 4.0 | 1.0 |
				| 102 |  | Intergovernmental processes | 3 566 476 | 6.4 | 1.2 |
				| 102-002 | Mitigation | Support for the operationalization of Article 6, paragraphs 2 and 8, of the Paris Agreement and the implementation of response measures | 1 049 844 | 1.0 | – |
				| 102-004 | Transparency | Comprehensive support for the technical reviews of national reports under the enhanced transparency framework and measurement, reporting and verification processes | 463 049 | 0.4 | 0.2 |
				| 102-006 | Communications and Engagement | Mobilization of non-Party stakeholders, including developing climate action events at sessions of the governing bodies and other impactful platforms | 1 397 085 | 3.0 | 1.0 |
				| 102-006 | Communications and Engagement | Comprehensive support for work related to gender, including enhancing inclusive stakeholder engagement | 656 498 | 2.0 | – |
				| 200 |  | Constituted bodies | 5 920 319 | 2.2 | 2.1 |
				| 200-004 | Transparency | Extensive support to developing countries to implement measurement, reporting and verification and the enhanced transparency framework, including through the work of the Consultative Group of Experts | 5 920 319 | 2.2 | 2.1 |
				| 300 |  | Data and information management | 5 924 850 | 8.0 | 2.0 |
				| 300-006 | Communications and Engagement | Participation in climate action globally is enabled, enhanced and recognized through the global climate action portal | 4 229 850 | 8.0 | 2.0 |
				| 300-009 | Administrative Services, Human Resources, and Information and Communication Technology | Enhancement and modernization of platforms and strengthening of the security of infrastructure and platforms | 1 695 000 | – | – |
				| 400 |  | Enhanced engagement | 29 521 020 | 33.9 | 6.7 |
				| 400-001 | Adaptation | Enhanced engagement with respect to climate change impacts, vulnerability and adaptation, including on anticipatory approaches and foresight to the attainment of long-term resilience | 2 371 463 | 1.0 | – |
				| 400-002 | Mitigation | Unlocking transformative climate solutions in collaboration with Parties and non-State actors | 13 363 567 | 11.5 | 2.0 |
				| 400-003 | Means of Implementation | Needs-based finance. Facilitating the access and mobilization of climate finance to support the priority mitigation and adaptation actions of developing countries | 2 397 453 | 2.0 | – |
				| 400-004 | Transparency | Additional support and enhanced engagement for the development and implementation of the enhanced transparency framework | 1 058 507 | 0.4 | 0.7 |
				| 400-005 | Intergovernmental Support and Collective Progress | Strengthening engagement with Parties, observer States and negotiating groups on issues related to the intergovernmental process globally and regionally | 1 274 587 | 1.0 | 1.0 |
				| 400-006 | Communications and Engagement | Administration and expansion of the Marrakech Partnership for Global Climate Action in order to catalyse collaborative climate action among Parties and non-Party stakeholders | 3 366 129 | 7.0 | 2.0 |
				| 400-006 | Communications and Engagement | Comprehensive support for communications campaigns for promoting achievements in the UNFCCC process and multilingual content for the UNFCCC website, mobile application and social media | 3 145 970 | 7.0 | – |
				| 400-006 | Communications and Engagement | Comprehensive support for work related to ACE, including enhancing inclusive stakeholder engagement | 1 685 711 | 4.0 | 1.0 |
				| 400-007 | Legal Affairs | Enhancement of the capacity of young negotiators, presiding officers, secretariat staff, observer organizations, policymakers and legislators to actively engage in the intergovernmental process and implement international climate commitments | 744 631 | – | – |
				| 400-009 | Administrative Services, Human Resources, and Information and Communication Technology | Enhancement of capacity for conferences and workshops | 113 000 | – | – |
				| 500 |  | Oversight and management | 1 702 458 | – | – |
				| 500-007 | Legal Affairs | Comprehensive provision of institutional and general legal review and advice with respect to all activities and operations of the secretariat | 7 458 | – | – |
				| 500-009 | Administrative Services, Human Resources, and Information and Communication Technology | Enhancement and modernization of infrastructure, networks and end-user equipment and productivity tools | 1 695 000 | – | – |
				| Total (including programme support costs) | 52 182 893 | 57.0 | 13.0 |
				
					a  Gross requirements, excluding any unspent balances that may be available at the beginning of the biennium.
		II.	Budget performance for the biennium 2022–2023
			30.	Takes note of the information contained in the documents on the budget performance for the biennium 2022–2023, the updated work programme of the secretariat for the biennium 2022–2023 and the status of contributions and fees as at 19 May 2023;
			31.	Expresses appreciation to Parties that made contributions to the core budget in a timely manner;
			32.	Expresses concern regarding the high level of outstanding contributions to the core budget for the current and previous bienniums, which has resulted in difficulties with cash flow and the effective implementation of activities;
			33.	Strongly urges Parties that have not made contributions in full to the core budget for the current and/or previous bienniums to do so without further delay;
			34.	Expresses appreciation for the contributions to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process and to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities received from Parties, including those contributions that allow for greater flexibility in allocation;
			35.	Reiterates its appreciation to the Government of Germany for its special contribution of EUR 1,789,522 as Host Government of the secretariat;
			36.	Requests the Executive Secretary to take further measures to reduce Parties’ outstanding contributions;
			37.	Expresses concern regarding the high number of recommendations made by the United Nations Board of Auditors that remain unimplemented and urges the Executive Secretary to implement the standing recommendations of the auditors as soon as possible and provide information to Parties on the planned implementation of new recommendations;
		III.	Other financial and budgetary matters
			38.	Takes note of the information contained in the documents prepared by the secretariat on other financial and budgetary matters, including on efforts to further improve the efficiency and transparency of the UNFCCC budget process and secretariat activities, programme delivery highlights and financial performance.
			11.	
Annex
	Indicative scale of contributions from Parties to the Convention for 2024–2025
		| Party | United Nations scale of assessments for 2022–‍2024 (%) | Convention and Paris Agreement adjusted scale for 2024–2025 (%) |
		| Afghanistan | 0.006 | 0.006 |
		| Albania | 0.008 | 0.008 |
		| Algeria | 0.109 | 0.106 |
		| Andorra | 0.005 | 0.005 |
		| Angola | 0.010 | 0.010 |
		| Antigua and Barbuda | 0.002 | 0.002 |
		| Argentina | 0.719 | 0.701 |
		| Armenia | 0.007 | 0.007 |
		| Australia | 2.111 | 2.058 |
		| Austria | 0.679 | 0.662 |
		| Azerbaijan | 0.030 | 0.029 |
		| Bahamas | 0.019 | 0.019 |
		| Bahrain | 0.054 | 0.053 |
		| Bangladesh | 0.010 | 0.010 |
		| Barbados | 0.008 | 0.008 |
		| Belarus | 0.041 | 0.040 |
		| Belgium | 0.828 | 0.807 |
		| Belize | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Benin | 0.005 | 0.005 |
		| Bhutan | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Bolivia (Plurinational State of) | 0.019 | 0.019 |
		| Bosnia and Herzegovina | 0.012 | 0.012 |
		| Botswana | 0.015 | 0.015 |
		| Brazil | 2.013 | 1.962 |
		| Brunei Darussalam | 0.021 | 0.020 |
		| Bulgaria | 0.056 | 0.055 |
		| Burkina Faso | 0.004 | 0.004 |
		| Burundi | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Cabo Verde | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Cambodia | 0.007 | 0.007 |
		| Cameroon | 0.013 | 0.013 |
		| Canada | 2.628 | 2.562 |
		| Central African Republic | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Chad | 0.003 | 0.003 |
		| Chile | 0.420 | 0.409 |
		| China | 15.254 | 14.870 |
		| Colombia | 0.246 | 0.240 |
		| Comoros | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Congo | 0.005 | 0.005 |
		| Cook Islands | 0.000 | 0.001 |
		| Costa Rica | 0.069 | 0.067 |
		| Côte d’Ivoire | 0.022 | 0.021 |
		| Croatia | 0.091 | 0.089 |
		| Cuba | 0.095 | 0.093 |
		| Cyprus | 0.036 | 0.035 |
		| Czechia | 0.340 | 0.331 |
		| Democratic People’s Republic of Korea | 0.005 | 0.005 |
		| Democratic Republic of the Congo | 0.010 | 0.010 |
		| Denmark | 0.553 | 0.539 |
		| Djibouti | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Dominica | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Dominican Republic | 0.067 | 0.065 |
		| Ecuador | 0.077 | 0.075 |
		| Egypt | 0.139 | 0.136 |
		| El Salvador | 0.013 | 0.013 |
		| Equatorial Guinea | 0.012 | 0.012 |
		| Eritrea | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Estonia | 0.044 | 0.043 |
		| Eswatini | 0.002 | 0.002 |
		| Ethiopia | 0.010 | 0.010 |
		| European Union | 0.000 | 2.500 |
		| Fiji | 0.004 | 0.004 |
		| Finland | 0.417 | 0.407 |
		| France | 4.318 | 4.209 |
		| Gabon | 0.013 | 0.013 |
		| Gambia | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Georgia | 0.008 | 0.008 |
		| Germany | 6.111 | 5.957 |
		| Ghana | 0.024 | 0.023 |
		| Greece | 0.325 | 0.317 |
		| Grenada | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Guatemala | 0.041 | 0.040 |
		| Guinea | 0.003 | 0.003 |
		| Guinea-Bissau | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Guyana | 0.004 | 0.004 |
		| Haiti | 0.006 | 0.006 |
		| Holy See | – | 0.001 |
		| Honduras | 0.009 | 0.009 |
		| Hungary | 0.228 | 0.222 |
		| Iceland | 0.036 | 0.035 |
		| India | 1.044 | 1.018 |
		| Indonesia | 0.549 | 0.535 |
		| Iran (Islamic Republic of) | 0.371 | 0.362 |
		| Iraq | 0.128 | 0.125 |
		| Ireland | 0.439 | 0.428 |
		| Israel | 0.561 | 0.547 |
		| Italy | 3.189 | 3.109 |
		| Jamaica | 0.008 | 0.008 |
		| Japan | 8.033 | 7.831 |
		| Jordan | 0.022 | 0.021 |
		| Kazakhstan | 0.133 | 0.130 |
		| Kenya | 0.030 | 0.029 |
		| Kiribati | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Kuwait | 0.234 | 0.228 |
		| Kyrgyzstan | 0.002 | 0.002 |
		| Lao People’s Democratic Republic | 0.007 | 0.007 |
		| Latvia | 0.050 | 0.049 |
		| Lebanon | 0.036 | 0.035 |
		| Lesotho | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Liberia | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Libya | 0.018 | 0.018 |
		| Liechtenstein | 0.010 | 0.010 |
		| Lithuania | 0.077 | 0.075 |
		| Luxembourg | 0.068 | 0.066 |
		| Madagascar | 0.004 | 0.004 |
		| Malawi | 0.002 | 0.002 |
		| Malaysia | 0.348 | 0.339 |
		| Maldives | 0.004 | 0.004 |
		| Mali | 0.005 | 0.005 |
		| Malta | 0.019 | 0.019 |
		| Marshall Islands | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Mauritania | 0.002 | 0.002 |
		| Mauritius | 0.019 | 0.019 |
		| Mexico | 1.221 | 1.190 |
		| Micronesia (Federated States of) | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Monaco | 0.011 | 0.011 |
		| Mongolia | 0.004 | 0.004 |
		| Montenegro | 0.004 | 0.004 |
		| Morocco | 0.055 | 0.054 |
		| Mozambique | 0.004 | 0.004 |
		| Myanmar | 0.010 | 0.010 |
		| Namibia | 0.009 | 0.009 |
		| Nauru | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Nepal | 0.010 | 0.010 |
		| Netherlands (Kingdom of the) | 1.377 | 1.342 |
		| New Zealand | 0.309 | 0.301 |
		| Nicaragua | 0.005 | 0.005 |
		| Niger | 0.003 | 0.003 |
		| Nigeria | 0.182 | 0.177 |
		| Niue | 0.000 | 0.001 |
		| North Macedonia | 0.007 | 0.007 |
		| Norway | 0.679 | 0.662 |
		| Oman | 0.111 | 0.108 |
		| Pakistan | 0.114 | 0.111 |
		| Palau | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Panama | 0.090 | 0.088 |
		| Papua New Guinea | 0.010 | 0.010 |
		| Paraguay | 0.026 | 0.025 |
		| Peru | 0.163 | 0.159 |
		| Philippines | 0.212 | 0.207 |
		| Poland | 0.837 | 0.816 |
		| Portugal | 0.353 | 0.344 |
		| Qatar | 0.269 | 0.262 |
		| Republic of Korea | 2.574 | 2.509 |
		| Republic of Moldova | 0.005 | 0.005 |
		| Romania | 0.312 | 0.304 |
		| Russian Federation | 1.866 | 1.819 |
		| Rwanda | 0.003 | 0.003 |
		| Saint Kitts and Nevis | 0.002 | 0.002 |
		| Saint Lucia | 0.002 | 0.002 |
		| Saint Vincent and the Grenadines | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Samoa | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| San Marino | 0.002 | 0.002 |
		| Sao Tome and Principe | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Saudi Arabia | 1.184 | 1.154 |
		| Senegal | 0.007 | 0.007 |
		| Serbia | 0.032 | 0.031 |
		| Seychelles | 0.002 | 0.002 |
		| Sierra Leone | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Singapore | 0.504 | 0.491 |
		| Slovakia | 0.155 | 0.151 |
		| Slovenia | 0.079 | 0.077 |
		| Solomon Islands | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Somalia | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| South Africa | 0.244 | 0.238 |
		| South Sudan | 0.002 | 0.002 |
		| Spain | 2.134 | 2.080 |
		| Sri Lanka | 0.045 | 0.044 |
		| State of Palestine | 0.000 | 0.011 |
		| Sudan | 0.010 | 0.010 |
		| Suriname | 0.003 | 0.003 |
		| Sweden | 0.871 | 0.849 |
		| Switzerland | 1.134 | 1.105 |
		| Syrian Arab Republic | 0.009 | 0.009 |
		| Tajikistan | 0.003 | 0.003 |
		| Thailand | 0.368 | 0.359 |
		| Timor-Leste | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Togo | 0.002 | 0.002 |
		| Tonga | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Trinidad and Tobago | 0.037 | 0.036 |
		| Tunisia | 0.019 | 0.019 |
		| Türkiye | 0.845 | 0.824 |
		| Turkmenistan | 0.034 | 0.033 |
		| Tuvalu | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Uganda | 0.010 | 0.010 |
		| Ukraine | 0.056 | 0.055 |
		| United Arab Emirates | 0.635 | 0.619 |
		| United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland | 4.375 | 4.265 |
		| United Republic of Tanzania | 0.010 | 0.010 |
		| United States of America | 22.000 | 21.447 |
		| Uruguay | 0.092 | 0.090 |
		| Uzbekistan | 0.027 | 0.026 |
		| Vanuatu | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) | 0.175 | 0.171 |
		| Viet Nam | 0.093 | 0.091 |
		| Yemen | 0.008 | 0.008 |
		| Zambia | 0.008 | 0.008 |
		| Zimbabwe | 0.007 | 0.007 |
		| Total | 100.000 | 100.000 |
		
			Notes: (1) For presentation purposes, all percentage figures for the UNFCCC revised indicative scale of contributions have been given to three decimal places; (2) Cook Islands, the European Union and Niue are Parties to the Convention but not United Nations Member States.
			5th plenary meeting
			13 December 2023
			
	Resolution 1/CP.28
	Expression of gratitude to the Government of the United Arab Emirates
		Resolution submitted by the Republic of Azerbaijan
			The Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
			Having met in Dubai from 30 November to 13 December 2023,
			1.	Express profound gratitude to the Government of the United Arab Emirates for having made it possible for the twenty-eighth session of the Conference of the Parties, the eighteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the fifth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to be held in Dubai;
			2.	Request the Government of the United Arab Emirates to convey to the city and people of Dubai the gratitude of the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement for the hospitality and warmth extended to the participants.
			5th plenary meeting
			11 December 2023
			
