|  | United Nations | FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.2 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 29 January 2016  Original: English |

Conference of the Parties
Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twenty-first session, held in Paris from 30 November to 13 December 2015
	Addendum
Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session
	Contents
Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties
	Decision		Page
	2/CP.21	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated 
with Climate Change Impacts		2
	3/CP.21	Report of the Adaptation Committee		3
	4/CP.21	National adaptation plans		4
	5/CP.21	Long-term climate finance		7
	6/CP.21	Report of the Standing Committee on Finance		8
		7/CP.21	Report of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties and 
guidance to the Green Climate Fund		10
		8/CP.21	Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties and 
guidance to the Global Environment Facility		13
			9/CP.21	Methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties included 
in Annex I to the Convention		15
	10/CP.21	The 2013–2015 review		23
		11/CP.21	Forum and work programme on the impact of the implementation of 
response measures		25
		12/CP.21		Enhancing climate technology development and transfer through the 
Technology Mechanism		27
		13/CP.21	Linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism of the Convention		28
	
Decision 2/CP.21
Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
	The Conference of the Parties,
	1.	Welcomes with appreciation the work by the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts (hereinafter referred to as the Executive Committee) as an important step in the operationalization of this mechanism;
		2.	Welcomes the report of the Executive Committee;
		3.	Decides that, as a consequence of the late nomination of members to the Executive Committee in 2015, the term of the members currently in office will end immediately before the first meeting of the Executive Committee in 2018 for members with a term of two years, and immediately before the first meeting of the Executive Committee in 2019 for members with a term of three years;
		4.	Also decides that, as a consequence of the adjustment to the terms of office of the members of the Executive Committee as referred to in paragraph 3 above, the terms of the Co-Chairs who are currently in office will end immediately before the first meeting of the Executive Committee in 2017;
		5.	Notes with concern the limited progress made in the implementation of the initial two-year workplan of the Executive Committee owing to the late nomination of members as referred to in paragraph 3 above;
		6.	Acknowledges with appreciation that the Executive Committee plans to schedule at least three meetings during 2016;
		7.	Urges the Executive Committee to explore modalities of work in order to fulfil its mandate in accordance with decisions 2/CP.19 and 2/CP.20;
		8.	Also urges Parties to make available sufficient resources for the successful and timely implementation of the initial two-year workplan of the Executive Committee in view of the ambitious nature of that workplan.
	10th plenary meeting
	10 December 2015
	
	
Decision 3/CP.21
Report of the Adaptation Committee
	The Conference of the Parties,
		1.	Welcomes the report of the Adaptation Committee, including its recommendations;
		2.	Also welcomes the workplan of the Adaptation Committee for the period 2016–2018 contained in the report referred to in paragraph 1 above;
		3.	Notes with appreciation the progress made by the Adaptation Committee in the implementation of its first three-year workplan;
		4.	Invites the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to enhance outreach activities that would facilitate policymakers’ understanding of the impact of different levels of warming on adaptation planning and actions;
		5.	Requests the Technology Executive Committee, in collaboration with the Climate Technology Centre and Network, the Adaptation Committee and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group, to consider how it can help Parties align their technology needs assessments with the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans;
		6.	Invites Parties to take into account climate risk screening of national development strategies and policies aimed at enhancing livelihoods and economic diversification to enhance climate resilience;
		7.	Requests the Adaptation Committee to further strengthen cooperation with the Standing Committee on Finance and other constituted bodies under the Convention, with a view to enhancing coherence and collaboration regarding adaptation finance as contained in the workplan of the Adaptation Committee referred to in paragraph 2 above;
		8.	Recalls decision 4/CP.20, which encourages Parties to nominate experts to the Adaptation Committee with a diversity of experience and knowledge relevant to adaptation to climate change, while also taking into account the need to achieve gender balance in accordance with decision 36/CP.7;
		9.	Notes the considerable time requirement that membership of the Adaptation Committee entails;
		10.	Reiterates its encouragement made to Parties in decision 11/CP.18, paragraph 6, to make available sufficient resources for the successful and timely implementation of the work of the Adaptation Committee;
		11.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat pursuant to the provisions contained in paragraph 2 above;
		12.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	10th plenary meeting
	10 December 2015
	
Decision 4/CP.21
National adaptation plans
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decisions 1/CP.16, 3/CP.17, 5/CP.17, 12/CP.18, 18/CP.19 and 3/CP.20,
	Acknowledging that the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans is still in its early stages,
	Noting with appreciation the pledges made by contributing Parties to the Green Climate Fund,
	Noting with concern the lack of funding in the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund for the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans,
	Noting with appreciation the contributions made by developed country Parties to the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund,
	Emphasizing the need to align technical support provided to developing country Parties for the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans with the principles, terminology and guidelines for the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans contained in decision 5/CP.17 and subsequent related decisions,
	Welcoming relevant publications of the Adaptation Committee and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group pertaining to the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans disseminated at this session,
	Noting decision B.11/04 of the Board of the Green Climate Fund on the readiness programme implementation (progress report), whereby it reaffirms that it may support a voluntary country-driven national adaptation planning process through its readiness and preparatory support programme, in coordination with other programmes and channels,
		1.	Notes with appreciation the progress made by developing country Parties in the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans;
		2.	Welcomes the submission by Burkina Faso and Cameroon of their national adaptation plans through NAP Central, and encourages other Parties to forward relevant outputs and outcomes related to the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans to NAP Central as they are invited to do in decision 3/CP.20, paragraph 9;
		3.	Notes that gaps and needs remain in relation to the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans, including in terms of access to financial support, data and reporting;
		4.	Acknowledges that it is too early to assess how the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans has contributed towards reducing vulnerability to climate change and that the measures undertaken by countries to date constitute incremental steps towards achieving the objectives of the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans;
		5.	Notes the progress made by some Parties in integrating climate change adaptation into relevant new and existing policies, programmes and activities, in particular development planning processes and strategies within relevant sectors and at different levels of decision-making;
		6.	Invites the Green Climate Fund, as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism, in accordance with paragraphs 36 and 40 of its governing instrument, to consider how to improve access to financial support for the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans;
		7.	Also invites developed country Parties to contribute to the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund;
		8.	Encourages United Nations organizations, specialized, bilateral and multilateral agencies and other relevant organizations to continue their efforts to coordinate support for the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans;
		9.	Invites United Nations organizations, specialized, bilateral and multilateral agencies and other relevant organizations to consider the gaps and needs, identified in the reports prepared on this matter, related to the provision of financial and technical support to developing country Parties for the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans;
		10.	Requests the Least Developed Countries Expert Group and the Adaptation Committee to consider how they can provide more information on accessing funding from the Green Climate Fund for the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans and to include such information, as appropriate, in their reports;
		11.	Also requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to assess progress made in the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans at its forty-eighth session (April–May 2018), with a view to making recommendations thereon to the Conference of the Parties, as appropriate;
		12.	Decides on the following actions and steps necessary for the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to initiate the assessment referred to in paragraph 11 above:
			(a)	To invite Parties and relevant organizations to submit to the secretariat, by 1 February 2018, information on their progress made towards the achievement of the objectives of the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans, experiences, best practices, lessons learned, gaps and needs, and support provided and received in the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans;
			(b)	To invite Parties to provide information, guided by a questionnaire, on an ongoing basis through NAP Central;
			(c)	To request the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on the progress made towards the achievement of the objectives of the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans, experiences, best practices, lessons learned, gaps and needs, and support provided and received in the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans, taking into account information contained in national reports under the Convention, the information referred to in paragraphs 12(a) and (b) above, information from relevant events, including the NAP Expos, and information from other relevant sources;
			(d)	To request the Least Developed Countries Expert Group, in collaboration with the Adaptation Committee, to organize a meeting of Party experts, at which the report referred to in paragraph 12(c) above would be considered, with a view to providing a summary of progress made in the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans;
			(e)	To request the Least Developed Countries Expert Group, in collaboration with the Adaptation Committee and with the support of the secretariat, to prepare a report on the meeting referred to in paragraph 12(d) above, for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its forty-eighth session in its assessment of progress made in the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans;
		13.	Also decides that the assessment referred to in paragraph 11 above should take into account all the guiding principles of the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans contained in decision 5/CP.17, paragraph 3;
		14.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat pursuant to the provisions contained in paragraph 12 above;
		15.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	10th plenary meeting
	10 December 2015
	
Decision 5/CP.21
Long-term climate finance
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling Articles 4 and 11 of the Convention,
	Also recalling decision 1/CP.16, paragraphs 2, 4 and 97–101, as well as decisions 1/CP.17, 2/CP.17, paragraphs 126–132, 4/CP.18, 3/CP.19 and 5/CP.20,
		1.	Welcomes with appreciation the pledges and announcements and progress made towards reaching the goal of jointly mobilizing USD 100 billion annually by 2020 by developed country Parties, in accordance with decision 1/CP.16, including financial contributions made to the Green Climate Fund, the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Adaptation Fund, providing further clarity to and predictability of public climate finance flows from 2015 to 2020;
	2.	Urges developed country Parties to continue efforts to channel a substantial share of public climate funds to adaptation activities and to strive to achieve a greater balance between finance for mitigation and adaptation, recognizing the importance of adaptation finance;
	3.	Takes note with appreciation of the summary report on the in-session workshop on long-term climate finance held in 2015;
	4.	Decides that the second biennial high-level ministerial dialogue on climate finance, to be convened in accordance with decision 3/CP.19, will focus on the issues of adaptation finance, needs for support to developing country Parties, and cooperation on enhanced enabling environments and support for readiness activities, and that it will be informed by the report of the in-session workshop on long-term climate finance in 2016 and the second biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows;
	5.	Requests the Presidency of the Conference of the Parties, with the support of the secretariat, to prepare a summary of the second biennial high-level ministerial dialogue on climate finance for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-third session (November 2017).
	10th plenary meeting
	10 December 2015
	
Decision 6/CP.21
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling Articles 4 and 11 of the Convention,
	Also recalling decisions 1/CP.16, paragraph 112, and 2/CP.17, paragraphs 120 and 121, as well as decisions 5/CP.18, 7/CP.19 and 6/CP.20,
		1.	Welcomes with appreciation the report of the Standing Committee on Finance to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session, taking note of the recommendations contained therein;
	2.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to continue to strengthen its engagement with all relevant stakeholders and bodies under the Convention;
	3.	Endorses the workplan of the Standing Committee on Finance for 2016–2017;
	4.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance, in implementing its workplan on the measurement, reporting and verification of support beyond the biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows, to continue to engage with relevant bodies under the Convention, multilateral and bilateral agencies, and international institutions;
	5.	Welcomes the third forum of the Standing Committee on Finance, on enhancing the coherence and coordination of forest financing, held on 8 and 9 September 2015 in Durban, South Africa;
	6.	Notes the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Finance from its third forum;
	7.	Expresses its gratitude to the Government of South Africa and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations for their support in ensuring the success of the third forum of the Standing Committee on Finance;
	8.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to report to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-second session (November 2016) on the progress made in the implementation of its workplan;
	9.	Decides to initiate the review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance referred to in decision 6/CP.20, paragraph 23, at the twenty-second session of the Conference of the Parties;
	10.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, at its forty-fifth session (November 2016), to prepare draft terms of reference for the review referred to in paragraph 9 above, on the basis of the submissions referred to in paragraph 11 below, for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-second session;
	11.	Also requests the members of the Standing Committee on Finance and invites Parties and observer organizations to submit their views on the terms of reference for the review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance by 21 September 2016, for compilation by the secretariat into a miscellaneous document;
	12.	Further requests the Standing Committee on Finance to consider the guidance provided to it in other relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties.
	10th plenary meeting
	10 December 2015
	
Decision 7/CP.21
Report of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties and guidance to the Green Climate Fund
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decision 7/CP.20,
	Noting the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Finance contained in its report to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session with regard to the provision of draft guidance to the Green Climate Fund,
		1.	Welcomes the report of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session and the information contained therein on the progress made by the Green Climate Fund towards its full operationalization;
	2.	Notes with appreciation the attainment of the effectiveness of the Green Climate Fund by achieving the 50 per cent threshold required for the Green Climate Fund to allocate its resources to projects and programmes;
	3.	Also notes with appreciation that the Board of the Green Climate Fund reached its aim of taking its first funding decisions by its third meeting of 2015, committing USD 168 million to eight public and private projects that will promote, in the context of sustainable development, the paradigm shift towards low-emission and climate-resilient development pathways, thereby making the Green Climate Fund fully operational;
	4.	Welcomes with appreciation pledges made to the Green Climate Fund since the twentieth session of the Conference of Parties;
	5.	Welcomes the aspirations of the Board of the Green Climate Fund to approve proposals in 2016 to a value of USD 2.5 billion;
	6.	Also welcomes the establishment of a project preparation facility that will be targeted to small-scale activities and direct access entities, and requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to consider lessons learned from other relevant facilities;
	7.	Further welcomes the allocation of up to USD 900 million for three pilot programmes on: enhancing direct access for recipient countries to the Green Climate Fund; supporting micro, small and medium-sized enterprises; and mobilizing resources at scale in order to address adaptation and mitigation;
	8.	Urges Parties that made pledges under the initial resource mobilization process of the Green Climate Fund but have not yet confirmed them to the Green Climate Fund through fully executed contribution arrangements or agreements to do so as a matter of high priority;
	9.	Reiterates the invitation for financial inputs from a variety of sources, public and private, including alternative sources, throughout the initial resource mobilization process;
	10.	Requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to agree on the arrangements for the first formal replenishment process of the Green Climate Fund as soon as feasible;
	11.	Welcomes the decision of the Board of the Green Climate Fund to develop a strategic plan for the Green Climate Fund and to adopt it as soon as possible;
	12.	Also welcomes the decision of the Board of the Green Climate Fund to simplify the funding proposal template and concept note template in an expeditious manner;
	13.	Requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to ensure that the revised funding proposal template and concept note template are designed to facilitate the application process;
	14.	Also requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to adopt a simplified process for approval of proposals for certain activities, in particular for small-scale activities, as soon as possible in 2016, to reduce complexities and costs involved in project proposal development;
	15.	Welcomes the decisions of the Board of the Green Climate Fund to approve the accreditation of 20 national, regional, international and private entities to the Green Climate Fund;
	16.	Urges the Board of the Green Climate Fund to streamline the accreditation modalities and to seek a balance of diversity in accredited entities;
	17.	Takes note of the progress achieved to date in the implementation of the readiness and preparatory support programme of the Green Climate Fund and stresses the importance of improving the approval process and timely disbursement of readiness resources to facilitate readiness programme implementation pursuant to Green Climate Fund Board decision B.11/04;
	18.	Requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to prioritize the development of its initial risk management framework;
	19.	Also requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to enhance transparency and stakeholder engagement;
	20.	Urges the Board of the Green Climate Fund to operationalize the Independent Evaluation Unit, Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit as a matter of urgency and to make public the procedures Parties and affected individuals should follow when seeking redress until the Independent Redress Mechanism is operationalized;
	21.	Invites the Board of the Green Climate Fund to take into account in its programmatic priorities the Cancun Adaptation Framework, in particular the principles referred to in decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 12, and the activities referred to in decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 14;
	22.	Also invites the Board of the Green Climate Fund, in line with paragraph 38 of the governing instrument of the Green Climate Fund, to consider ways to provide support, pursuant to the modalities of the Green Climate Fund, for facilitating access to environmentally sound technologies in developing country Parties, and for undertaking collaborative research and development for enabling developing country Parties to enhance their mitigation and adaptation action;
	23.	Urges the Board of the Green Climate Fund to operationalize results-based payments for activities referred to in decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 70, consistent with decision 9/CP.19, and in accordance with Green Climate Fund Board decision B.08/08;
	24.	Encourages the Board of the Green Climate Fund to consider the mobilization of private sector finance to progress the Green Climate Fund’s forestry-related result areas;
		25.	Requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to take into account decision 16/CP.21, in particular paragraph 6, referring to support for alternative policy approaches, such as joint mitigation and adaptation approaches for the integral and sustainable management of forests, as appropriate, in its funding decisions;
	26.	Encourages the Board of the Green Climate Fund to improve complementarity and coherence with other institutions, per paragraphs 33 and 34 of the governing instrument of the Green Climate Fund, including by engaging with relevant bodies of the Convention, such as the Standing Committee on Finance;
	27.	Urges the Board of the Green Climate Fund to develop appropriate mechanisms to support the fund through appropriate expert and technical advice, including from thematic bodies, as appropriate;
	28.	Requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to report to the Conference of Parties on the steps it has taken to implement the guidance provided in this decision and other relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties;
	29.	Invites Parties to submit to the secretariat annually, in writing and no later than 10 weeks prior to each session of the Conference of the Parties, their views and recommendations on the elements to be taken into account in developing guidance to the Green Climate Fund.
	11th plenary meeting
	13 December 2015
	
Decision 8/CP.21
Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties and guidance to the Global Environment Facility
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decisions 12/CP.2, 3/CP.16, 5/CP.16, 7/CP.16, 11/CP.17, 9/CP.18, 6/CP.19 and 8/CP.20,
	Welcoming the report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session and the information contained therein on the implementation of the sixth replenishment of the Global Environment Facility,
	Also welcoming the pledges and contributions made to the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund,
	Noting the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Finance contained in its report to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session with regard to the provision of draft guidance to the Global Environment Facility,
		1.	Notes that the Global Environment Facility has supported implementation of the remaining elements of the least developed countries work programme, including the update and implementation of national adaptation programmes of action, by providing funding to projects aimed at building capacity for the least developed countries to participate effectively in climate change processes, promoting public awareness on climate change issues, promoting the transfer of adaptation technology, and strengthening meteorological and hydrological services;
	2.	Welcomes the investments by the Global Environment Facility in sustainable forest management and activities referred to in decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 70, harnessing multiple benefits from forests and tackling deforestation and forest degradation in line with the programming directions of the sixth replenishment of the Global Environment Facility Trust Fund;
	3.	Invites the Global Environment Facility to continue to provide finance to the activities referred to in paragraph 2 above, also taking into account decision 9/CP.19, paragraph 8, and decision 16/CP.21, as appropriate;
	4.	Encourages additional voluntary financial contributions to provide support for the national adaptation plan process through contributions to the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund;
	5.	Welcomes the addition of eight project agencies to the network of the Global Environment Facility;
	6.	Notes that the Independent Evaluation Office of the Global Environment Facility is carrying out a review of the Least Developed Countries Fund;
	7.	Encourages the Global Environment Facility to include the conclusions of the review referred to in paragraph 6 above in its report to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-second session (November 2016);
	8.	Requests the Global Environment Facility to carry out a technical review of the programme priorities of the Least Developed Countries Fund, taking into account the independent review referred to in paragraph 6 above, and to focus the technical review on, inter alia:
		(a)	Undertaking pilot concrete climate change activities that are particularly relevant for the least developed countries;
		(b)	Enhancing longer-term institutional capacity to design and execute the activities referred to in paragraph 8(a) above;
	9.	Urges the Global Environment Facility to work with all its agencies and recipient countries to ensure that these countries can take full advantage of the expanded network of agencies;
	10.	Welcomes the exploration of innovative non-grant instruments by the Global Environment Facility, and encourages the Global Environment Facility to work with its agencies, recipient countries and the private sector to submit proposals;
	11.	Also welcomes the approval of projects by the Global Environment Facility to support 46 developing country Parties in preparing their intended nationally determined contributions, and encourages the Global Environment Facility to continue providing such support;
	12.	Requests the Global Environment Facility to consider how to support developing country Parties in formulating policies, strategies, programmes and projects to implement activities that advance priorities identified in their respective intended nationally determined contributions in a manner consistent with the operational policies and guidelines of the Global Environment Facility, starting in 2016;
	13.	Notes the actions of the Global Environment Facility to establish a more coherent, system-based approach for managing and sharing information and knowledge gained from projects and programmes of the Global Environment Facility in order to improve the effectiveness of the Global Environment Facility and its agencies and enhance the capacity of recipient countries;
	14.	Welcomes the efforts to date of the Global Environment Facility to engage with the Green Climate Fund and encourages both entities to further articulate and build on the complementarity of their policies and programmes within the Financial Mechanism of the Convention;
	15.	Invites Parties to submit to the secretariat annually, in writing and no later than 10 weeks prior to each session of the Conference of the Parties, their views and recommendations on the elements to be taken into account in developing guidance to the Global Environment Facility;
	16.	Requests the Global Environment Facility to include, in its annual report to the Conference of the Parties, information on the steps it has taken to implement the guidance provided in this decision and other relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties.
	10th plenary meeting
	10 December 2015
	
Decision 9/CP.21
Methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling Articles 4, 5, 7, 10 and 12 of the Convention,
	Also recalling decisions 9/CP.2, 11/CP.4, 4/CP.5 and 1/CP.16, paragraph 40,
	Further recalling decisions 2/CP.17, paragraph 19, and 11/CP.20,
		1.	Recognizes the need to enhance common understanding on key terminology for reporting financial information under the Convention to facilitate transparency and comparability of information and data on support over time and across Parties;
			2.	Welcomes the submissions from Parties and observer organizations on methodologies for the reporting of financial information, and the technical paper summarizing existing international methodologies, drawing on relevant information contained in, inter alia, submissions from Parties and observer organizations;
			3.	Also welcomes the joint in-session technical workshop on the methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention organized under the auspices of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice, the Subsidiary Body for Implementation and the Standing Committee on Finance, taking note of the summary of the workshop;
			4.	Further welcomes the update of the Standing Committee on Finance on this matter, as a part of its work on the measurement, reporting and verification of support beyond the biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows provided during the forty-third session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice;
			5.	Welcomes the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Finance on the methodologies for the reporting of financial information, as referred to in decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 19, contained in its report to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session;
			6.	Decides to enhance consistency and transparency through adjustments in the reporting parameters in tables 7, 7(a) and 7(b) of the common tabular format for the “UNFCCC biennial reporting guidelines for developed country Parties” by:
				(a)	Creating reporting fields for the provision of information on definitions or methodologies used for reporting information in the following reporting parameters: “climate-specific” or “core/general”, “status”, “funding source”, “activity”, “financial instrument”, “type of support” and “sector”;
				(b)	Improving the software for tables 7, 7(a) and 7(b) of the common tabular format by extending the number of input rows in the Microsoft Excel file;
				(c)	Aligning the categorization in the reporting parameter “status” of support (“pledged”, “committed” and “provided”) in tables 7, 7(a) and 7(b) of the common tabular format with the categorization used in other existing international methodologies (“committed” and “disbursed”);
			7.	Requests the secretariat to revise the electronic reporting application for a common tabular format, in accordance with the provisions contained in the annex, in time for the preparation and submission of the biennial reports of Parties due in 2018;
			8.	Decides that developed country Parties shall use the revised electronic reporting application, taking into account their national circumstances, when preparing and submitting their biennial reports in 2018 in accordance with decision 2/CP.17;
			9.	Requests Parties included in Annex II to the Convention to continue to provide information on the underlying assumptions and the methodologies used in their biennial reports;
			10.	Also requests the secretariat to improve the software of the biennial report data interface to allow for search functions on the UNFCCC website to collect information per key category in tables 7, 7(a) and 7(b) of the common tabular format (i.e. category “recipient country/region, financial instrument”);
			11.	Further requests the secretariat to explore ways of creating links to other reporting software and platforms to facilitate the importation and exportation of activity-level data, and to inform the Standing Committee on Finance to take this into consideration in its workplan;
			12.	Requests the secretariat to update the UNFCCC national focal points when the information referred to in paragraph 6 above on climate finance directed to recipient countries as reported under the Convention is made available;
			13.	Also requests the Standing Committee on Finance to take into account the enhanced information provided by Parties included in Annex II to the Convention referred to in paragraph 6 above in its biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows;
			14.	Further requests the Standing Committee on Finance to take into account the work on the methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention in the context of its workplan on the measurement, reporting and verification of support;
			15.	Invites the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to take into consideration the adjustments referred to in paragraph 6 above in its revision of the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications”, to be completed at the twenty-second session of the Conference of the Parties (November 2016);
			16.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat pursuant to the provisions contained in paragraphs 7, 10 and 11 above;
			17.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		
Annex
	Revised common tabular format for the “UNFCCC biennial reporting guidelines for developed country Parties”
		The following tables shall replace tables 7, 7(a) and 7(b) of the common tabular format for the “UNFCCC biennial reporting guidelines for developed country Parties”.
		
		
		Table 7
		Provision of public financial support: summary information in 20XX-3a
		|  | Year |  |
		| Allocation channels | Domestic currency |  | USDb |
		|  | Core/ generalc, 1 | Climate-specificd, 2 |  | Core/ generalc | Climate-specificd, 2 |
		|  |  | Mitigation | Adaptation | Cross-cuttinge | Otherf |  |  | Mitigation | Adaptation | Cross-cuttinge | Otherf |
		| Total contributions through multilateral channels: Multilateral climate change fundsg |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		| Other multilateral climate change fundsh |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		| Multilateral financial institutions, including regional development banks |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		| Specialized United Nations bodies |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		| Total contributions through bilateral, regional and other channels |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		| Total |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		
			Note: Explanation of numerical footnotes is provided in the documentation box after tables 7, 7(a) and 7(b).
			Abbreviation:  USD = United States dollars.
			a   Parties should fill in a separate table for each year, namely 20XX-3 and 20XX-2, where 20XX is the reporting year.
			b   Parties should provide an explanation of the methodology used for currency exchange for the information provided in tables 7, 7(a) and 7(b) in the documentation box.
			c   This refers to support to multilateral institutions that Parties cannot specify as being climate-specific.
			d   Parties should explain in their biennial reports how they define funds as being climate-specific.
			e   This refers to funding for activities that are cross-cutting across mitigation and adaptation.
			f   Please specify.
			g   Multilateral climate change funds listed in paragraph 17(a) of the “UNFCCC biennial reporting guidelines for developed country Parties” in decision 2/CP.17.
			h   Other multilateral climate change funds as referred to in paragraph 17(b) of the “UNFCCC biennial reporting guidelines for developed country Parties” in decision 2/CP.17.
				
		
		Table 7(a)
		Provision of public financial support: contribution through multilateral channels in 20XX-3a
		| Donor funding | Total amount | Statusb, 3 | Funding source4 | Financial instrument5 | Type of 
support6 | Sectorc, 7 |
		|  | Core/generald, 1 | Climate-specifice, 2 | Committed
 Disbursed | ODA
OOF
Otherf | Grant Concessional loan Non-concessional loan Equity
Otherf | Mitigation
Adaptation 
Cross-cuttingg
Otherf | Energy Transport Industry Agriculture Forestry Water and sanitation Cross-cutting Otherf Not applicable |
		|  | Domestic currency | USD | Domestic currency | USD |  |  |  |  |  |
		| Multilateral climate change funds 1.  Global Environment Facility 2.  Least Developed Countries Fund 3.  Special Climate Change Fund 4.  Adaptation Fund 5.  Green Climate Fund 6.  UNFCCC Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities 7.  Other multilateral climate change funds |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		| Subtotal |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		| Multilateral financial institutions, including 
regional development banks 1.  World Bank 2.  International Finance Corporation 3.  African Development Bank 4.  Asian Development Bank 5.  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 6.  Inter-American Development Bank 7.  Other |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		| Subtotal |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		| Specialized United Nations bodies 1.  United Nations Development Programme (specific programmes) 2. United Nations Environment Programme 
(specific programmes)  3. Other |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		| Subtotal |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		| Total |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		
			Note:  Explanation of numerical footnotes is provided in the documentation box after tables 7, 7(a) and 7(b).
			Abbreviations: ODA = official development assistance, OOF = other official flows, USD = United States dollars.
			a   Parties should fill in a separate table for each year, namely 20XX-3 and 20XX-2, where 20XX is the reporting year.
			b   Parties should explain, in their biennial reports, the methodologies used to specify the funds as disbursed and committed. Parties will provide the information for as many status categories as appropriate in the following order of priority: disbursed and committed.
			c   Parties may select several applicable sectors. Parties may report sectoral distribution, as applicable, under “Other”.
				d   This refers to support to multilateral institutions that Parties cannot specify as being climate-specific.
			e   Parties should explain in their biennial reports how they define funds as being climate-specific.
			f   Please specify.
			g   This refers to funding for activities that are cross-cutting across mitigation and adaptation.
				
		Table 7(b)
		Provision of public financial support: contribution through bilateral, regional and other channels in 20XX-3a
		| Recipient country/
region/project/programme/activityb | Total amount | Statusc, 3 | Funding source4 | Financial instrument5 | Type of
 support6 | Sectord, 7 | Additional Informatione |
		|  | Climate-specificf, 2 | Committed
 Disbursed | ODA
OOF
Otherg | Grant
Concessional loan Non-concessional loan Equity
Otherg | Mitigation
Adaptation
Cross-cuttingh Otherg | Energy
Transport
Industry
Agriculture
Forestry
Water and sanitation
Cross-cutting
Otherg |  |
		|  | Domestic currency | USD |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
		
			Note: Explanation of numerical footnotes is provided in the documentation box after tables 7, 7(a) and 7(b).
			Abbreviations: ODA = official development assistance, OOF = other official flows, USD = United States dollars.
			a   Parties should fill in a separate table for each year, namely 20XX-3 and 20XX-2, where 20XX is the reporting year.
			b   Parties should report, to the extent possible, on details contained in this table.
			c   Parties should explain, in their biennial reports, the methodologies used to specify the funds as disbursed and committed. Parties will provide the information for as many status categories as appropriate in the following order of priority: disbursed and committed.
			d   Parties may select several applicable sectors. Parties may report sectoral distribution, as applicable, under “Other”.
			e   Parties should report, as appropriate, on project details and the implementing agency.
			f   Parties should explain in their biennial reports how they define funds as being climate-specific.
			g   Please specify.
				h   This refers to funding for activities that are cross-cutting across mitigation and adaptation.
		
		
		Documentation box
			| 1: Core/general |
			|  |
			| 2: Climate-specific |
			|  |
			| 3:  Status |
			|  |
			| 4:  Funding source |
			|  |
			| 5: Financial instrument |
			|  |
			| 6: Type of support |
			|  |
			| 7: Sector |
			|  |
			| Each Party shall provide an indication of what new and additional financial resources it has provided and clarify how it has determined that such resources are new and additional. Please provide this information in relation to tables 7(a) and (b). |
			|  |
			
			
			
				10th plenary meeting
				10 December 2015
				
				
				
Decision 10/CP.21
The 2013–2015 review
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling Article 2 of the Convention,
	Also recalling decisions 1/CP.16, paragraphs 138 and 139, 1/CP.17, paragraph 6, 2/CP.17, paragraphs 157–167, and 1/CP.18, paragraphs 79–91,
	1.	Takes note of the work of the structured expert dialogue, which contributed to completing the phases of the 2013–2015 review reflected in decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 164, and of the report on the structured expert dialogue, including the 10 messages highlighted therein;
	2.	Expresses its appreciation and gratitude to all those involved in the structured expert dialogue;
	3.	Notes that the structured expert dialogue completed its work, as described in decision 1/CP.18, paragraphs 86–89;
	4.	Decides, in relation to the adequacy of the long-term global goal, and in the light of the ultimate objective of the Convention, that the goal is to hold the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels, recognizing that this would significantly reduce the risks and impacts of climate change;
	5.	Also decides that, in the light of the overall progress made towards achieving the long-term global goal, including consideration of the implementation of the commitments under the Convention, Parties should act urgently and ambitiously under the Convention while recognizing the technological, economic and institutional challenges;
	6.	Notes that, although some progress has already been made by UNFCCC bodies in scaling up financial, technological and capacity-building support, significant gaps still exist in terms of both the scale and the speed of such progress;
	7.	Also notes that there continue to be information gaps in relation to the areas covered within the scope of the 2013–2015 review as set out in decision 1/CP.18, paragraph 79;
	8.	Encourages the scientific community to address information and research gaps identified during the structured expert dialogue, including scenarios that limit warming to below 1.5 °C relative to pre-industrial levels by 2100 and the range of impacts at the regional and local scales associated with those scenarios;
	9.	Recalls that the next periodic review should be conducted in accordance with decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 167, and agrees that the next periodic review should be conducted in an effective and efficient manner, avoid duplication of work, and take into account the results of relevant work conducted under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol and the subsidiary bodies;
	10.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to consider the scope of the next periodic review, referred to in paragraph 9 above, with a view to forwarding a recommendation for consideration by the Conference of the Parties by no later than 2018, as appropriate;
	11.	Agrees to reconvene the structured expert dialogue in conjunction with the next periodic review;
	12.	Notes that the first periodic review fulfilled its mandate, as contained in decisions 1/CP.16, paragraphs 138 and 139, 1/CP.17, paragraph 6, 2/CP.17, paragraphs 157–167, and 1/CP.18, paragraphs 79–91.
	11th plenary meeting
	13 December 2015
	
Decision 11/CP.21
Forum and work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2,
	Reaffirming the relevant principles and provisions of the Convention related to the economic and social consequences of response measures, in particular its Articles 2, 3 and 4,
	Recalling decisions 5/CP.7, 1/CP.10, 1/CP.13, 1/CP.16, 2/CP.17, 8/CP.17, 1/CP.18 and 31/CMP.1, and Article 4, paragraphs 8, 9 and 10, of the Convention, as well as Article 2, paragraph 3, and Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol,
	Acknowledging Parties’ repeated calls for a continued and structured exchange of information on both the positive and the negative consequences of response measures and on ways to maximize the positive and minimize the negative consequences for Parties, in line with the work programme on this matter developed by the subsidiary bodies,
	Noting that the review of the work of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures, pursuant to decision 8/CP.17, paragraph 5, has been concluded,
	Affirming that a more focused consideration of issues is needed for improving the effectiveness of the process,
	1.	Decides to continue and improve the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures, which shall provide a platform allowing Parties to share, in an interactive manner, information, experiences, case studies, best practices and views, and to facilitate assessment and analysis of the impact of the implementation of response measures, with a view to recommending specific actions;
	2.	Also decides to focus work under the improved forum on, inter alia, the provision of concrete examples, case studies and practices in order to enhance the capacity of Parties, in particular developing country Parties, to deal with the impact of the implementation of response measures;
	3.	Requests the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies to convene the improved forum in order to implement the work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures referred to in paragraph 5 below, which will continue to be convened under a joint agenda item of the subsidiary bodies and operate in accordance with the procedures applicable to contact groups. The improved forum shall meet twice a year in conjunction with the sessions of the subsidiary bodies, with its first meeting taking place at the forty-fourth sessions (May 2016) of the subsidiary bodies;
	4.	Also requests the subsidiary bodies, in order to advance the work of the improved forum, to constitute ad hoc technical expert groups, as appropriate, to elaborate on the technical work under the improved forum. The ad hoc technical expert groups shall consist of balanced regional representation of Parties;
	5.	Adopts the work programme comprising the following areas:
		(a)	Economic diversification and transformation;
		(b)	Just transition of the workforce, and the creation of decent work and quality jobs;
	6.	Decides that the implementation of the work programme shall address the needs of all Parties, in particular developing country Parties, and shall be informed, inter alia, by the assessment and analysis of impacts, including the use and development of economic modelling, taking into account all relevant policy issues of concern;
	7.	Requests the subsidiary bodies to review every three years, beginning at their forty-ninth sessions (November 2018), the work programme of the improved forum, including the modalities for its operation;
	8.	Decides that the improved forum shall provide recommendations to the subsidiary bodies on the actions referred to in paragraph 1 above for their consideration, with a view to recommending those actions, as appropriate, to the Conference of the Parties, beginning at its twenty-third session (November 2017);
	9.	Requests the secretariat to prepare, subject to the availability of financial resources, a guidance document to assist developing country Parties to assess the impact of the implementation of response measures, including guidance on modelling tools, as well as technical materials to assist developing country Parties in their economic diversification initiatives, for consideration at the forty-fourth sessions of the subsidiary bodies;
	10.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat pursuant to the provisions contained in paragraph 9 above;
	11.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	11th plenary meeting
	13 December 2015
	
	
Decision 12/CP.21
Enhancing climate technology development and transfer through the Technology Mechanism
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decisions 1/CP.16, 2/CP.17, 4/CP.17, 1/CP.18, 13/CP.18, 14/CP.18, 25/CP.19, 16/CP.20 and 17/CP.20, in particular paragraph 3,
		1.	Welcomes with appreciation the joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network for 2015, which contains information on their respective activities and on the performance of their respective functions;
		2.	Invites the Technology Executive Committee and the Advisory Board of the Climate Technology Centre and Network to update the procedures for preparing the joint chapter of their joint annual report;
		3.	Also invites Parties and all relevant entities working on technology development and transfer to consider the key messages contained in the report referred to in paragraph 1 above;
		4.	Welcomes the interim report by the Technology Executive Committee on guidance on enhanced implementation of the results of technology needs assessments, noting that the report should be considered final;
		5.	Notes that the Technology Executive Committee is to elaborate the outline for guidance on the preparation of technology action plans, contained in the annex to the report referred to in paragraph 4 above, and make it available in early 2016 to developing country Parties for use in informing the technology needs assessment process;
		6.	Invites the Climate Technology Centre and Network to use the guidance referred to in paragraph 5 above when responding to requests from developing country Parties regarding the provision of assistance to enable the implementation of the results of their technology needs assessments.
	10th plenary meeting
	10 December 2015
	
Decision 13/CP.21
Linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism of the Convention
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decisions 1/CP.18, paragraph 62, and 3/CP.17, paragraph 17,
		1.	Welcomes with appreciation the recommendations of the Technology Executive Committee on linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism, as contained in the report of the Technology Executive Committee on this matter;
		2.	Welcomes the ongoing and positive dialogue between the Green Climate Fund, the Global Environment Facility, the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network;
		3.	Also welcomes the contribution of the Global Environment Facility to the activities of the Climate Technology Centre and Network and looks forward to ongoing cooperation between these two entities;
		4.	Invites the Board of the Green Climate Fund to provide its recommendations, in accordance with decision 1/CP.18, paragraph 62, for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-second session (November 2016);
		5.	Recognizes the importance of and the need for defined, mutually beneficial and functional linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism through its operating entities, the Global Environment Facility and the Green Climate Fund;
		6.	Also recognizes that the definition and elaboration of linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism has the aim of ensuring financial resources for, and scaling up action on, technology development and transfer;
		7.	Underlines the need for the Technology Executive Committee, the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism to enhance cooperation and collaboration with a view to enhancing the fulfilment and implementation of their respective mandates effectively, in accordance with Article 12, paragraph 4, of the Convention;
		8.	Requests the Technology Executive Committee, the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism to continue to consult on and further elaborate, including through an in-session workshop at the forty-fourth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (May 2016), the linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism;
		9.	Also requests the Technology Executive Committee to include, in its annual report, the findings arising from the activities referred to in paragraph 8 above for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-second session, taking into consideration the recommendations referred to in paragraph 4 above;
		10.	Invites the Board of the Green Climate Fund, in line with paragraph 38 of the governing instrument of the Green Climate Fund, to consider ways to provide support, pursuant to the modalities of the Green Climate Fund, for facilitating access to environmentally sound technologies in developing country Parties, and for undertaking collaborative research and development for enabling developing country Parties to enhance their mitigation and adaptation action.
	11th plenary meeting
	13 December 2015
	
