|  | United Nations | FCCC/CP/2018/10/Add.2 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 19 March 2019  Original: English |

Conference of the Parties
Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twenty-fourth session, held in Katowice from 2 to 15 December 2018
	Addendum
	Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-fourth session
Contents
Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties
	Decision	Page
	12/CP.24	Review of the Climate Technology Centre and Network		2
	13/CP.24	Enhancing climate technology development and transfer through 
the Technology Mechanism		3
	14/CP.24	Linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial 
Mechanism of the Convention		5
	15/CP.24	Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on 
Capacity-building		6
	16/CP.24	Least developed countries work programme		7
	17/CP.24	Dates and venues of future sessions		9
	18/CP.24	Administrative, financial and institutional matters		11
		Resolution
	1/CP.24	Expression of gratitude to the Government of the Republic of 
Poland and the people of the city of Katowice		13
	Decision 12/CP.24
Review of the Climate Technology Centre and Network
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decisions 1/CP.16, 2/CP.17, 1/CP.18, 14/CP.18, 14/CP.23 and 15/CP.23,
	1.	Notes the management response of the United Nations Environment Programme on the relevant findings and recommendations of the independent review of the effective implementation of the Climate Technology Centre and Network, in response to decision 14/CP.23, paragraph 7;
	2.	Notes with appreciation that the Climate Technology Centre and Network has undertaken initial efforts in response to the relevant recommendations referred to in paragraph 1 above;
	3.	Invites Parties, national designated entities and the United Nations Environment Programme as host of the Climate Technology Centre, in collaboration with the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the Advisory Board of the Climate Technology Centre and Network, to implement the relevant recommendations referred to in paragraph 1 above when implementing their further activities relevant to the work of the Climate Technology Centre and Network;
	4.	Also invites the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism to consider implementing the relevant recommendations referred to in paragraph 1 above when implementing their further activities relevant to the work of the Climate Technology Centre and Network;
	5.	Further invites Parties and the Climate Technology Centre and Network to enhance the provision of support for strengthening the capacity of national designated entities, as appropriate;
	6.	Requests the Climate Technology Centre and Network to include in the joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network for 2019 and in the subsequent reports to the Conference of the Parties, through the subsidiary bodies, information on its plans and actions undertaken in response to the relevant recommendations referred to in paragraph 1 above, taking into account Parties’ deliberations at this session;
	7.	Also requests the secretariat to organize a dialogue, in conjunction with the fifty-fifth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (November 2021), to consider the findings of the second independent review of the effective implementation of the Climate Technology Centre and Network, pursuant to decision 14/CP.23, paragraph 10.
		7th plenary meeting
		13 December 2018
	

Decision 13/CP.24
Enhancing climate technology development and transfer through the Technology Mechanism
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decisions 1/CP.18, 13/CP.18, 17/CP.20, 12/CP.21, 15/CP.22, 3/CP.23, 13/CP.23 and 15/CP.23,
	1.	Welcomes the joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network for 2018 and the progress of their work on facilitating the effective implementation of the Technology Mechanism;
	2.	Notes the collaboration of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network;
	3.	Encourages the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network to enhance their collaboration, including to ensure the coherence and synergy of their work;
	4.	Notes the challenges and lessons learned as reported by the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network, and encourages them to further improve the reporting on this matter in their future joint annual reports, including on their efforts to address the challenges;
	5.	Notes with appreciation the enhanced engagement and collaboration of the Technology Executive Committee, the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the Green Climate Fund on innovation and collaborative research, development and demonstration, including the promotion of climate technology incubators and accelerators, and encourages their continued and enhanced collaboration;
	6.	Takes note of the collaboration of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network with the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, constituted bodies under the Convention and other relevant organizations;
	7.	Welcomes the information provided by the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network on the monitoring and evaluation of the impact of their activities, and encourages them to continue reporting on this matter and to include information on tracking of progress and on methodologies used;
	I.	Activities and performance of the Technology Executive Committee in 2018
		8.	Invites Parties and all relevant stakeholders working on technology development and transfer, when implementing climate technology action, to consider the recommendations of the Technology Executive Committee for follow-up actions based on the outcomes of the 2018 technical expert meetings, as well as its key messages for 2018 on climate technology entrepreneurship, South–South and triangular cooperation on climate technologies, and technology needs assessments, all of which are contained in the joint annual report referred to in paragraph 1 above;
		9.	Also invites the Technology Executive Committee to continue enhancing its communication and outreach strategy with a view to expanding the reach of its outputs to national designated entities and other regional stakeholders;
	II.	Activities and performance of the Climate Technology Centre and Network in 2018
		10.	Notes the progress made by the Climate Technology Centre and Network in 2018 in implementing its programme of work;
		11.	Welcomes with appreciation the efforts of the Climate Technology Centre and Network to mobilize additional resources for implementing its functions, and encourages the continuation of those efforts;
		12.	Encourages the Climate Technology Centre and Network to enhance its engagement with the Green Climate Fund with respect to utilizing the Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme and the Project Preparation Facility;
		13.	Also encourages the enhanced engagement of the Climate Technology Centre and Network with the Green Climate Fund, including through the strengthening of the collaboration between national designated authorities for the Green Climate Fund and national designated entities for technology development and transfer;
		14.	Notes that the Climate Technology Centre and Network continues to face challenges that require attention regarding sustainable funding for implementing its functions, and that further financial support should be provided, recalling decision 2/CP.17, paragraphs 139 and 141;
		15.	Also notes that an increasing number of the technical assistance requests submitted to the Climate Technology Centre and Network are directly related to recommendations and priorities identified in technology needs assessments, and encourages the Climate Technology Centre and Network to continue to prioritize the implementation of the outcome of the technology needs assessments;
		16.	Decides to extend to two years the maximum term of office of members of the Advisory Board of the Climate Technology Centre and Network representing environmental non-governmental organizations, business and industry non-governmental organizations and research and independent non-governmental organizations to allow their constituencies to contribute more effectively to the Board’s discussions and to bring their terms of office in line with those of the other members.
		8th plenary meeting
		14 December 2018
		
Decision 14/CP.24
Linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism of the Convention
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decisions 1/CP.18, paragraph 62, 13/CP.21 and 14/CP.22,
		1.	Welcomes the information provided by the Technology Executive Committee, the Climate Technology Centre and Network, the Global Environment Facility and the Green Climate Fund on their actions in strengthening the linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism in their annual reports to the Conference of the Parties in response to decision 14/CP.22, paragraph 9;
		2.	Acknowledges the ongoing coordination between the national designated entities for technology development and transfer and the national designated authorities of the Green Climate Fund as well as the Global Environment Facility focal points, and encourages enhanced coordination in this area;
		3.	Welcomes with appreciation the increased engagement between the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the Green Climate Fund with respect to using the Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme of the Fund, and notes with appreciation the support provided by the Fund for readiness requests submitted by national designated authorities;
		4.	Invites the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the Green Climate Fund to continue enhancing collaboration, wherein the services and expertise of the Climate Technology Centre and Network can be used to strengthen proposals seeking support under the Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme of the Fund, noting the need for such engagement in supporting developing country Parties in building their capacity for undertaking technology projects and programmes;
		5.	Welcomes the support provided for technology development and transfer by the Global Environment Facility and the Green Climate Fund through projects and programmes, including for projects resulting from technology needs assessments;
		6.	Invites developing country Parties to seek support from the Climate Technology Centre and Network to develop and submit technology-related projects, including those resulting from technology needs assessments and from the technical assistance of the Climate Technology Centre and Network, to the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism for implementation, in accordance with their respective policies and processes;
		7.	Also invites the Climate Technology Centre and Network to consult with the Green Climate Fund and the Global Environment Facility to identify ways to enhance information-sharing among national designated entities, national designated authorities and Global Environment Facility focal points;
		8.	Welcomes with appreciation the collaboration between the Technology Executive Committee, the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the Green Climate Fund on climate technology incubators and accelerators, noting that this will help inform the Green Climate Fund as it develops the terms of reference for a request for proposals to support climate technology incubators and accelerators, in response to decision 13/CP.21;
		9.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, at its fifty-third session (November 2020), to take stock of progress in strengthening the linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism with a view to recommending a draft decision on this matter, including on the consideration of a conclusion on this matter, for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-sixth session (November 2020).
	8th plenary meeting
	14 December 2018
	
Decision 15/CP.24
Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decisions 2/CP.17, 1/CP.21, 2/CP.22, 16/CP.22 and 16/CP.23,
		1.	Welcomes the annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building for 2018, taking note of the recommendations contained therein;
		2.	Invites Parties, the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, the constituted bodies under the Convention, United Nations organizations, observers and other stakeholders to consider the recommendations referred to in paragraph 1 above and to take any necessary action, as appropriate and in accordance with their mandates;
		3.	Welcomes the collaboration of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building with non-Party stakeholders, including through its capacity-building hub and the use of social media tools;
		4.	Invites Parties and relevant institutions to provide support and resources to the Paris Committee on Capacity-building in implementing its rolling workplan for 2017–2019 in the light of the aim of the Committee established in decision 1/CP.21;
		5.	Takes note of the decision of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building to continue its 2018 focus area of capacity-building activities for the implementation of nationally determined contributions in the context of the Paris Agreement in 2019;
		6.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to thematically align future meetings of the Durban Forum with the annual focus area of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, taking note of the recommendation of the Committee contained in its 2018 technical progress report.
	7th plenary meeting
	13 December 2018
	
Decision 16/CP.24
Least developed countries work programme
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decisions 5/CP.7, 29/CP.7, 4/CP.11, 8/CP.13, 6/CP.16, 5/CP.17, 12/CP.18, 3/CP.20, 4/CP.21 and 19/CP.21,
	Recognizing the specific needs and special situations of the least developed countries referred to in Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Convention,
	Having considered the report on the 33rd meeting of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group and the views of Parties on the least developed countries work programme,
	Acknowledging that, because of their development status, climate change risks magnify the development challenges for the least developed country Parties,
	Also acknowledging that the human, infrastructural and economic conditions of the least developed countries severely limit their capacities to participate effectively in the climate change process,
	Noting the particular support needs of the least developed countries with respect to addressing climate change, and the importance of the least developed countries work programme in this regard,
	Also noting the relevance of climate change action to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
	1.	Notes with satisfaction the support provided under and outside the Convention for the implementation of the elements of the work programme for the implementation of Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Convention (the least developed countries work programme) contained in decision 5/CP.7, paragraphs 11–17;
	2.	Takes note of the support provided to the least developed countries for the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans;
	3.	Decides to update the elements of the least developed countries work programme as listed below in order to reflect the needs of the least developed countries, taking full account of the numerous groups and bodies that are involved in assisting countries with these activities, noting the importance of avoiding duplication of work, and taking into account available resources:
		(a)	Continue strengthening existing, and where needed establishing, national climate change secretariats and/or focal points to enable the effective implementation of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement in the least developed country Parties;
		(b)	Continue providing training, as needed, in negotiating skills and language to develop the capacity of negotiators from the least developed countries to participate effectively in the climate change process;
		(c)	Supporting the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans and related relevant adaptation strategies, including national adaptation programmes of action;
		(d)	Supporting the preparation and implementation of successive nationally determined contributions;
		(e)	Continue promoting public awareness programmes to ensure the dissemination of information on climate change issues;
		(f)	Continue strengthening cooperative action on adaptation technology development and transfer;
		(g)	Continue strengthening the capacity of meteorological and hydrological services to collect, analyse, model, interpret and disseminate weather and climate information to support the implementation of adaptation actions;
		(h)	Continue supporting capacity-building initiatives to enable effective engagement in reporting and review activities under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, as needed;
	4.	Notes that support for the work programme should come from a variety of sources, including the Least Developed Countries Fund, the Global Environment Facility, the Green Climate Fund, and other bilateral and multilateral sources within their respective mandates, and the private sector, as appropriate;
	5.	Requests the Least Developed Countries Expert Group to support, and encourages other relevant bodies and programmes under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement, including United Nations entities, to assist with, in accordance with their respective mandates, as appropriate, the implementation of the least developed countries work programme and to include information on this in their reports, as appropriate;
	6.	Also requests the Least Developed Countries Expert Group to continue considering ways to promote South–South cooperation in the implementation of the least developed countries work programme.
	7th plenary meeting
	13 December 2018
Decision 17/CP.24
Dates and venues of future sessions
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling Article 7, paragraph 4, of the Convention,
	Also recalling United Nations General Assembly resolution 40/243 of 18 December 1985 on the pattern of conferences,
	Further recalling rule 22, paragraph 1, of the draft rules of procedure being applied,
	regarding the rotation of the office of President among the five regional groups,
	I.	Dates and venues of future sessions
		A.	2019
			1.	Decides to accept with appreciation the offer of the Government of Chile to host the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the Parties, the fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the second session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
			2.	Acknowledges the request of the Government of Chile to review the planned dates of the sessions referred to in paragraph 1 above, and invites the Executive Secretary to conduct consultations on the matter and to inform the Bureau of the outcome of the consultations;
			3.	Invites the Bureau to decide on the dates of the sessions;
			4.	Requests the Executive Secretary to continue consultations with the Government of Chile and to negotiate and finalize a Host Country Agreement for convening the sessions, in conformity with United Nations General Assembly resolution 40/243 and in compliance with the provisions of United Nations administrative instruction ST/AI/342, with a view to concluding and signing the Host Country Agreement not later than the fiftieth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (June 2019) for its prompt implementation;
			5.	Also requests the Executive Secretary to provide the host country with technical support and guidance on UNFCCC policies and requirements, taking into account the issues raised by Parties regarding the organization of such sessions, and to report back regularly to the Bureau;
		B.	2020
			6.	Notes that, in keeping with the principle of rotation among the regional groups, the President of the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties, the sixteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the third session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement would come from the Western European and other States;
			7.	Invites Parties to undertake further consultations on the hosting of the sessions referred to in paragraph 6 above;
			8.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, at its fiftieth session, to consider the issue of the host of the sessions referred to in paragraph 6 above and to recommend a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-fifth session (December 2019);
	II.	Calendar of meetings of the Convention, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement bodies
		9.	Decides to adopt the following dates for the sessional periods in 2023:
			(a)	First sessional period: Monday, 5 June, to Thursday, 15 June;
			(b)	Second sessional period: Monday, 6 November, to Friday, 17 November.
		8th plenary meeting
		14 December 2018
Decision 18/CP.24
Administrative, financial and institutional matters
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling the financial procedures for the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, its subsidiary bodies and its permanent secretariat,
	Having considered the information contained in the documents prepared by the secretariat on administrative, financial and institutional matters,
	Noting that notifications to Parties of their contributions for 2019 were sent to them on 30 September 2018,
	I.	Budget performance for the biennium 2018–2019
		1.	Takes note of the information contained in the report on budget performance for the biennium 2018–2019 as at 30 June 2018 and the note on the status of contributions to the trust funds administered by the secretariat as at 16 November 2018;
		2.	Expresses its appreciation to Parties that made contributions to the core budget in a timely manner;
		3.	Expresses concern regarding the high level of outstanding contributions to the core budget for the current and previous bienniums, which has resulted in difficulties with cash flow and the effective implementation of activities;
		4.	Strongly urges Parties that have not made contributions in full to the core budget for the current and/or previous bienniums to do so without further delay;
		5.	Calls upon Parties to make their contributions to the core budget for 2019 in a timely manner, bearing in mind that contributions are due on 1 January of each year in accordance with the financial procedures for the Conference of the Parties;
			6.	Expresses its appreciation for the contributions to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process and to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities received from Parties, including those contributions that allow for greater flexibility in allocation;
		7.	Urges Parties to further contribute to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process in order to ensure the widest possible participation in the negotiations in 2019, and to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities;
			8.	Reiterates its appreciation to the Government of Germany for its annual voluntary contribution to the core budget of EUR 766,938 and its special contribution of EUR 1,789,522 as Host Government of the secretariat;
			9.	Requests the Executive Secretary to take further measures to recover outstanding contributions and encourages Parties to pay those outstanding contributions as soon as possible;
	II.	Audit report and financial statements for 2017
		10.	Takes note of the audit report of the United Nations Board of Auditors and the financial statements for 2017, which include recommendations, and the comments of the secretariat thereon;
		11.	Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations for arranging the audit of the accounts of the Convention;
		12.	Also expresses its appreciation to the auditors for the valuable observations and recommendations and the presentation made thereon to Parties;
		13.	Requests the Executive Secretary to implement the recommendations of the auditors, as appropriate, in particular those related to outstanding contributions and the policies on hiring consultants and individual contractors, and to update Parties on progress in the next audit report;
	III.	Other budgetary matters
		14.	Also requests the Executive Secretary to present the outcome of its review of the secretariat’s operations and structure, including on the synergy and prioritization of its activities, with a view to reducing redundancies and increasing cost-efficiency, in the context of the programme budget for 2020–2021;
		15.	Further requests the Executive Secretary to prepare, regularly update and publish before each session of the subsidiary bodies brief reports on standard costs and, if available, options for reducing the cost of activities where practicable;
		16.	Requests the Executive Secretary to provide budgetary cost implications in pre-session documents if they include suggestions for new mandates to the secretariat and if sufficient information is available on the details of the proposed activities;
		17.	Also requests the Executive Secretary to provide any other such information to Parties as may be required to ensure that the budgetary implications of decisions and conclusions, including those proposed in pre-session documents, can be taken into account in advance of decision-making.
		12th plenary meeting
		15 December 2018
Resolution 1/CP.24
Expression of gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Poland and the people of the city of Katowice
	Resolution submitted by Fiji
		The Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Having met in Katowice from 2 to 14 December 2018,
		1.	Express their profound gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Poland for having made it possible for the twenty-fourth session of the Conference of the Parties, the fourteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the third part of the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to be held in Katowice;
		2.	Request the Government of the Republic of Poland to convey to the city and people of Katowice the gratitude of the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement for the hospitality and warmth extended to the participants.
		12th plenary meeting
		15 December 2018
		
