|  | United Nations | FCCC/CP/2019/13/Add.1 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 16 March 2020  Original: English |

Conference of the Parties
Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twenty-fifth session, held in Madrid from 2 to 15 December 2019
	Addendum
	Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-fifth session
	Contents
Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties
	Decision	Page
	1/CP.25	Chile Madrid Time for Action		2
	2/CP.25	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated 
with Climate Change Impacts and its 2019 review 		5
	3/CP.25	Enhanced Lima work programme on gender and its gender 
action plan 		6
	4/CP.25	Workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of 
response measures and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the 
Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures 		16
	5/CP.25	Scope of the second periodic review of the long-term global goal 
under the Convention and of overall progress towards 
achieving it		26
	6/CP.25	Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national 
communications for Parties included in Annex I to the 
Convention		28
	
Decision 1/CP.25
Chile Madrid Time for Action
	The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling decisions 1/CP.19, 1/CP.20, 1/CP.21, 1/CP.22, 1/CP.23 and 1/CP.24,
		Noting decision 1/CMA.2,
		Cognizant of the efforts and concerns of civil society, in particular of youth and indigenous peoples, in calling for urgent and ambitious global climate action,
	1.	Recognizes the role of multilateralism and the Convention, including its processes and principles, in addressing climate change and its impacts;
	2.	Also recognizes the important advances made through the UNFCCC multilateral process over the past 25 years, including in the context of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement;
	3.	Notes with concern the state of the global climate system;
	4.	Recognizes that action taken to address climate change is most effective if it is based on best available science and continually re-evaluated in the light of new findings;
	5.	Also recognizes the role of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in providing scientific input to inform Parties in strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty;
	6.	Expresses its appreciation and gratitude to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the scientific community for providing the 2019 Special Reports, which reflect the best available science, and encourages Parties to continue to support the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change;
	7.	Invites Parties to make use of the information contained in the Special Reports referred to in paragraph 6 above in their discussions under all relevant agenda items of the UNFCCC governing and subsidiary bodies;
	8.	Re-emphasizes with serious concern the urgent need to address the significant gap between the aggregate effect of Parties’ mitigation efforts in terms of global annual emissions of greenhouse gases by 2020 and aggregate emission pathways consistent with holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels;
	9.	Recalls that the current need for adaptation is significant and that greater levels of mitigation can reduce the need for additional adaptation efforts, and that greater adaptation needs can involve greater adaptation costs;
	10.	Stresses the urgency of enhanced ambition in order to ensure the highest possible mitigation and adaptation efforts by all Parties;
	11.	Recalls the commitment made by developed country Parties, in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation, to a goal of mobilizing jointly USD 100 billion per year by 2020 to address the needs of developing country Parties, in accordance with decision 1/CP.16;
	12.	Emphasizes the continued challenges that developing countries face in accessing financial, technology and capacity-building support, and recognizes the urgent need to enhance the provision of support to developing country Parties for strengthening their national adaptation and mitigation efforts;
	13.	Calls on international entities, including financial institutions, to continue supporting the development and implementation of measures to avert, minimize and address the adverse impacts of climate change;
	14.	Recalls that the provision of scaled-up financial resources should aim to achieve a balance between adaptation and mitigation, taking into account country-driven strategies, and the priorities and needs of developing country Parties, especially those that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change and have significant capacity constraints, such as the least developed countries and small island developing States, considering the need for public and grant-based resources for adaptation;
	15.	Underlines the essential contribution of nature to addressing climate change and its impacts and the need to address biodiversity loss and climate change in an integrated manner;
	16.	Recalls the imperatives of a just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs in accordance with nationally defined development priorities;
	17.	Welcomes the adoption of the enhanced five-year Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan, which promotes gender equality and women’s empowerment in the UNFCCC process, and encourages Parties to advance its implementation;
	18.	Acknowledges that the stocktakes in 2018 and 2019 helped to highlight and enhance the understanding of efforts of, and challenges faced by, Parties in relation to action and support in the pre-2020 period as well as of the work of the UNFCCC bodies in relation to that period;
	19.	Decides to hold, at its twenty-sixth session (November 2020), a round table among Parties and non-Party stakeholders on pre-2020 implementation and ambition;
	20.	Invites Parties and non-Party stakeholders to submit inputs via the submission portal by September 2020 to inform the round table referred to in paragraph 19 above;
	21.	Requests the secretariat to prepare a summary report by September 2021 on the basis of the outcomes of the round table referred in paragraph 19 above to serve as an input for the second periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it;
	22.	Commends the President of the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-fifth session for convening high-level ministerial events at the session, aimed at improving climate action, especially with regard to agriculture, energy, finance and science;
	23.	Notes with appreciation the organization by the President of the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-fifth session of a ministerial dialogue on adaptation ambition, which exemplified the broad support for, and high-level engagement among Parties on, enhanced adaptation action;
	24.	Welcomes the initiative of the United Nations Secretary-General to convene the 2019 Climate Action Summit, which helped to build momentum in enhancing global ambition;
	25.	Expresses its appreciation to the Parties and non-Party stakeholders that announced voluntary initiatives and coalitions at the Summit referred to in paragraph 24 above as well as to those that led and joined such initiatives and coalitions;
	26.	Acknowledges the important role of non-Party stakeholders in contributing to progress towards the objective of the Convention and the goals of the Paris Agreement, in particular by supporting Parties in reducing emissions and adapting to the adverse effects of climate change;
	27.	Welcomes the continuation of the Marrakech Partnership for Global Climate Action and decides to continue to appoint high-level champions, for 2021–2025, and to continue convening annually a high-level event together with the Executive Secretary and the incumbent and incoming Presidents of the Conference of the Parties;
	28.	Requests the high-level champions to explore how to improve the work under the Marrakech Partnership for Global Climate Action for enhancing ambition taking into account feedback from Parties and non-Party stakeholders;
	29.	Also requests the secretariat to continue engaging with non-Party stakeholders and enhancing the effectiveness of the Non-State Actor Zone for Climate Action platform, including the tracking of voluntary action;
	30.	Commends the efforts of the President of the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-fifth session to highlight the importance of the ocean, including as an integral part of the Earth’s climate system, and of ensuring the integrity of ocean and coastal ecosystems in the context of climate change;
	31.	Requests the Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice to convene at its fifty-second session (June 2020) a dialogue on the ocean and climate change to consider how to strengthen mitigation and adaptation action in this context;
	32.	Also requests the Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice to convene at its fifty-second session a dialogue on the relationship between land and climate change adaptation related matters, not intervening in other processes under the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement, including those carried out under the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice;
	33.	Invites Parties and non-Party stakeholders to submit inputs via the submission portal by 31 March 2020 to inform the dialogues referred to in paragraphs 31–32 above;
	34.	Requests the Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice to prepare informal summary reports on the dialogues referred to in paragraphs 31–32 above;
	35.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in this decision;
	36.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	8th plenary meeting
15 December 2019
	
	
Decision 2/CP.25
Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts and its 2019 review
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decision 4/CP.22, paragraph 2,
	1.	Notes decision 2/CMA.2, on the outcome of the review of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts and the report of its Executive Committee;
	2.	Also notes that considerations related to the governance of the Warsaw International Mechanism will continue at its twenty-sixth session (November 2020).
	8th plenary meeting
15 December 2019
Decision 3/CP.25
Enhanced Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan
	The Conference of the Parties,
	Recalling decisions 36/CP.7, 1/CP.16, 23/CP.18, 18/CP.20, 1/CP.21, 21/CP.22 and 3/CP.23, the Paris Agreement and the Katowice climate package,
	Acknowledging the continuing need for gender mainstreaming through all relevant targets and goals in activities under the Convention as an important contribution to increasing their effectiveness, fairness and sustainability,
	Also acknowledging the important role of the Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan in advancing gender equality and women’s empowerment in the UNFCCC process, demonstrated by the review by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation,
	Noting with appreciation the contributions received from Parties and observers in support of the gender mainstreaming work undertaken to date,
	Recognizing with concern that climate change impacts on women and men can often differ owing to historical and current gender inequalities and multidimensional factors and can be more pronounced in developing countries and for local communities and indigenous peoples,
	Acknowledging that climate change is a common concern of humankind, Parties should, when taking action to address climate change, respect, promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights, the right to health, the rights of indigenous peoples, local communities, migrants, children, persons with disabilities and people in vulnerable situations and the right to development, as well as gender equality, empowerment of women and intergenerational equity,
	Taking into account the imperatives of a just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs in accordance with nationally defined development priorities,
	1.	Welcomes the report on the implementation of the Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan, and recognizes the action taken by Parties, UNFCCC constituted bodies, the secretariat and observers to implement them;
	2.	Takes note of the report on the gender composition of Party delegations and constituted bodies, which highlights the persistent lack of progress in and the urgent need for improving the representation of women in Party delegations and constituted bodies;
	3.	Also takes note of the report on progress in integrating a gender perspective into constituted body processes, which indicates that an increasing number of constituted bodies are reporting on gender, and encourages constituted bodies to continue strengthening their efforts in this area;
	4.	Encourages Parties to enhance their efforts to advance the implementation of the decisions referred to in the preamble;
	5. 	Adopts the enhanced five-year Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan as contained in the annex;
	6.	Acknowledges that capacity-building, knowledge management and the sharing of experience are essential to supporting relevant actors in designing and implementing gender-responsive climate action and for increasing the effectiveness and scaling up of these measures;
	7.	Recognizes that the full, meaningful and equal participation and leadership of women in all aspects of the UNFCCC process and in national- and local-level climate policy and action is vital for achieving long-term climate goals;
	8.	Acknowledges that coherence with relevant United Nations processes, in particular the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as applicable, and within national implementation will contribute to improving the efficiency and effectiveness of efforts to integrate gender considerations into climate action;
	9.	Notes that gender-responsive implementation and means of implementation of climate policy and action can enable Parties to raise ambition, as well as enhance gender equality, and just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs in accordance with nationally defined development priorities;
	10.	Decides to undertake a review of the implementation of the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan at the sixty-first session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (November 2024), identifying progress and further work to be undertaken, and to conduct an intermediate review of the progress of implementation of the activities contained in the gender action plan at the fifty-sixth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (June 2022);
	11.	Encourages Parties to appoint and provide support for a national gender and climate change focal point for climate negotiations, implementation and monitoring;
	12.	Requests all constituted bodies to continue to include in their regular reports information on progress towards integrating a gender perspective into their processes;
	13.	Invites Parties to submit information on efforts and steps taken to implement the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan in their national reporting under the UNFCCC process, as applicable;
	14.	Also invites relevant public and private entities to increase the gender-responsiveness of climate finance with a view to strengthening the capacity of women;
	15.	Requests the secretariat to continue to:
		(a)	Maintain the position of senior gender focal point to retain relevant expertise and support and monitor the implementation of the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan;
		(b)	Prepare an annual gender composition report and a biennial synthesis report on progress in integrating a gender perspective into constituted body processes;
		(c)	Provide capacity-building support to constituted bodies and secretariat staff in integrating a gender perspective into their respective areas of work in collaboration with relevant organizations, as appropriate;
		(d)	Facilitate coordination with other United Nations entities, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations when supporting the implementation of the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan;
		(e)	Facilitate support for building and strengthening the skills and capacities of national gender and climate change focal points;
		(f)	Enhance communication and information-sharing through existing UNFCCC web-based resources and communication activities;
		(g)	Participate in the United Nations System-Wide Action Plan on Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women to strengthen the integration of gender considerations within the organization and work of the secretariat;
	16.	Invites Parties to provide support for developing country Parties to address gender-related action under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, including in relation to the UNFCCC gender action plan;
	17.	Encourages Parties and relevant organizations to participate and engage in the implementation of the gender-related activities within the gender action plan, as appropriate;
	18.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 15 above and activities A.1–5, B.1–3, C.1–3, D.1–3 and 6, and E.1–2 in the annex;
	19.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
Annex
Gender action plan
	1.	The enhanced gender action plan sets out objectives and activities under five priority areas that aim to advance knowledge and understanding of gender-responsive climate action and its coherent mainstreaming in the implementation of the UNFCCC and the work of Parties, the secretariat, United Nations entities and all stakeholders at all levels, as well as women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in the UNFCCC process.
Priority areas
	2.	Parties, the secretariat, UNFCCC constituted bodies and relevant organizations are invited to undertake the activities set out in the gender action plan, as appropriate.
	3.	The gender action plan sets out, in five priority areas, the activities that will drive the achievement of its objectives (see tables 1–5). The objectives of each priority area follow in paragraphs 4–8 below.
	A.	Capacity-building, knowledge management and communication
		4.	To enhance the systematic integration of gender considerations into climate policy and action and the application of understanding and expertise to the actions called for under the Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan, and facilitate outreach, knowledge-sharing and the communication of activities undertaken to enhance gender-responsive climate action and its impacts in advancing women’s leadership, achieving gender equality and ensuring effective climate action.
	B.	Gender balance, participation and women’s leadership
		5.	To achieve and sustain the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in the UNFCCC process.
	C.	Coherence
		6.	To strengthen the integration of gender considerations within the work of UNFCCC constituted bodies, the secretariat and other United Nations entities and stakeholders towards the consistent implementation of gender-related mandates and activities.
	D.	Gender-responsive implementation and means of implementation
		7.	To ensure the respect, promotion and consideration of gender equality and the empowerment of women in the implementation of the Convention and the Paris Agreement.
	E.	Monitoring and reporting
		8.	To improve tracking of the implementation of and reporting on gender-related mandates under the Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan.
		
			Table 1
		Priority area A: capacity-building, knowledge management and communication
			| Activities | Responsibilities | Timeline | Deliverables/outputs | Level of implementation |
			| A.1 Strengthen capacity-building efforts for governments and other stakeholders in mainstreaming gender in formulating, monitoring, implementing and reviewing, as appropriate, national climate change policies, plans, strategies and action, including nationally determined contributions, national adaptation plans and national communications | Leading: Parties, relevant organizations Contributing: national gender and climate change focal points, secretariat | Ongoing to COP 30
(2024) | Implementation of capacity-building for developing gender-responsive climate change policy | Regional, national |
			| A.2 Discuss and clarify the role and the work of the national gender and climate change focal points, including through providing capacity-building, tools and resources, sharing experience and best practices, workshops, knowledge exchange, peer-to-peer learning, mentoring and coaching | Leading: secretariat Contributing: national gender and climate change focal points, relevant organizations, Parties | SB 52 (2020) | In-session workshop  Recommendations on the role of the national gender and climate change focal point | International |
			|  | Leading: relevant organizations  Contributing: secretariat, national gender and climate change focal points | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | Provision of capacity-building opportunities, tools and resources | Regional, national |
			| A.3 Enhance capacity-building for governments and other relevant stakeholders to collect, analyse and apply sex-disaggregated data and gender analysis in the context of climate change, where applicable | Leading: relevant organizations Contributing: Parties | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | Promotion of tools, guidelines and training | Regional, national, local |
			| A.4 Strengthen the evidence base and understanding of the differentiated impacts of climate change on men and women and the role of women as agents of change and on opportunities for women | Parties, relevant organizations, the research community | SB 54 (2021) | Submissions on:  - Dimensions and examples of the gender-differentiated impacts of climate change  - The role of women as agents of change  - Opportunities for women | International, regional, national |
			|  | Secretariat | By SB 56
(2022) | Synthesis report on the submissions | International |
			|  | Invite Parties, relevant organizations, the research community and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to participate in an event to present relevant information upon publication of the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change | By COP 28 (2022) | SBI–SBSTA special event | International, regional, national |
			| A.5 Promote the use of social media, web resources and innovative communication tools to effectively communicate to the public, in particular reaching out to women, on the implementation of the Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan and on gender equality | Leading: Parties, relevant organizations, secretariat | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | Effective communication through social media, web resources and innovative communication tools | International, regional, national |
			
			
				Table 2
		Priority area B: gender balance, participation and women’s leadership
			| Activities | Responsibilities | Timeline | Deliverables/outputs | Level of implementation |
			| B.1 Promote initiatives for capacity-building in leadership, negotiation and facilitation of negotiation for women delegates, including through webinars and in-session training to enhance women’s participation in the UNFCCC process | Leading: Parties, relevant organizations  Contributing: secretariat | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | Workshops, capacity-building initiatives, webinars | International, regional, national |
			| B.2 Promote travel funds as a means of supporting the equal participation of women in all national delegations at UNFCCC sessions, as well as funds to support the participation of grass-roots local and indigenous peoples’ communities from developing countries, the least developed countries and small island developing States, and encourage Parties and relevant organizations to share information on travel funding | Leading: Parties Contributing: relevant organizations, secretariat | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | Mobilization of travel funds to increase women’s participation in the UNFCCC process | International, regional, national |
			| B.3 Invite the Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform Facilitative Working Group to collaborate and co-host a dialogue to discuss advancing the leadership and highlighting the solutions of local communities and indigenous women and ways of enhancing their effective participation in climate policy and action, to the extent that it is consistent with the workplan of the Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform Facilitative Working Group and within existing resources | Invite to collaborate: Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform Facilitative Working Group, secretariat  Contributing: Parties, relevant organizations | SB 57 (2022) | Dialogue | International, regional |
			|  | Secretariat | SB 58 (2023) | Dialogue report | International |
			
			
				Table 3
		Priority area C: coherence
			| Activities | Responsibilities | Timeline | Deliverables/outputs | Level of implementation |
			| C.1 Ensure that members of constituted bodies are introduced to gender-related mandates and to the relevance of gender in the context of their work in a consistent and systematic manner | Leading: secretariat  Contributing: relevant organizations | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | All new members of constituted bodies are introduced to the importance of gender-responsiveness | International |
			| C.2 Facilitate the exchange of views and best practices of the Chairs of constituted bodies on how to strengthen the integration of the gender perspective into their work, taking into account the synthesis reports on progress in integrating a gender perspective into constituted body processes referred to in paragraph 15(b) of this decision | Leading: Chairs of constituted bodies Contributing: secretariat | SB 56 (2022) | Selection of topics for dialogue | International |
			|  | Leading: secretariat Contributing: relevant organizations | SB 56 (2022) | Compilation of good practices for integrating gender into the work of the constituted bodies | International |
			|  | Leading: Chairs of constituted bodies Contributing: secretariat | SB 58 (2023) | Dialogue | International |
			|  | Secretariat | SB 59 (2023) | Dialogue report | International |
			| C.3 Strengthen coordination between the work on gender considerations of the subsidiary bodies under the Convention and the Paris Agreement and other relevant United Nations entities and processes, in particular the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as applicable | Leading: secretariat Contributing: Parties, constituted bodies, relevant organizations | COP sessions from COP 26 (2020) | In-session dialogue on Gender Day focused on one thematic area relevant to the Convention and the Paris Agreement to promote coherence reflecting multidimensional factors | International |
			
			
				Table 4
		Priority area D: gender-responsive implementation and means of implementation
			| Activities | Responsibilities | Timeline | Deliverables/outputs | Level of implementation |
			| D.1 Share experience and support capacity-building on gender budgeting, including on the integration of gender-responsive budgeting into national budgets to advance gender-responsive climate policies, plans, strategies and action, as appropriate | Parties, secretariat, relevant organizations | 31 July 2022 | Submissions | International |
			|  | Leading: relevant organizations Contributing: Parties, national gender and climate change focal points, secretariat, relevant national finance and budgeting entities, any other relevant entity | 2022 | Expert group meeting | International, regional, national |
			|  | Leading: secretariat Contributing: relevant organizations | COP 28 (2022) | Gender Day theme | International |
			| D.2 Raise awareness of the financial and technical support available for promoting the strengthening of gender integration into climate policies, plans, strategies and action, as appropriate, including good practices to facilitate access to climate finance for grass-roots women’s organizations and indigenous peoples and local communities | Leading: secretariat, Parties  Contributing: Adaptation Fund, Global Environment Facility, Green Climate Fund, private sector, philanthropic financial institutions, other relevant organizations | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | Webinars, communication materials, in-session workshops | International, regional, national |
			| D.3 Promote the deployment of gender-responsive technological solutions to address climate change, including strengthening, protecting and preserving local, indigenous and traditional knowledge and practices in different sectors and for improving climate resilience, and by fostering women’s and girls’ full participation and leadership in science, technology, research and development | Leading: Parties, relevant organizations, constituted bodies Contributing: secretariat | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | Workshops, capacity-building initiatives, webinars | International, regional, national |
			| D.4 Support the collection and consolidation of information and expertise on gender and climate change in sectors and thematic areas as well as identifying experts on gender and climate change, as needed, and enhance knowledge platforms on gender and climate change | Leading: Parties, relevant organizations Contributing: secretariat | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | Knowledge and expertise platforms on gender and climate change | International, regional, national |
			| D.5 Engage women’s groups and national women and gender institutions in the process of developing, implementing and updating climate policies, plans, strategies and action, as appropriate, at all levels | Parties, relevant organizations | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | Engagement of women’s groups and national women and gender institutions in developing and implementing climate policies, plans, strategies and action, as appropriate | National |
			|  | Parties, relevant organizations | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | Peer-to-peer exchange on country experience and needs | Regional |
			|  | Parties, relevant organizations | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | Open call for submissions to share experience | International, national |
			| D.6 Exchange information on lessons learned among Parties that have integrated gender into national climate policies, plans, strategies and action, as appropriate (e.g. information on results, impacts and main challenges), and on the actions that Parties are taking to mainstream gender in any updates thereto, as appropriate | Parties, relevant organizations | 31 March 2020 | Submissions on lessons learned | International, national |
			|  | Leading: secretariat Contributing: national gender and climate change focal points, relevant organizations | SB 52 (2020) | In-session workshop on lessons learned and actions taken in any updates | International |
			|  | Secretariat | SB 53 (2020) | Informal workshop report | International |
			|  | Leading: relevant organizations  Contributing: secretariat, national gender and climate change focal points | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | Workshops, dialogues, training expert meetings | Regional, national |
			| D.7 Enhance the availability of sex-disaggregated data for gender analysis, taking into consideration multidimensional factors, to better inform gender-responsive climate policies, plans, strategies and action, as appropriate | Leading: relevant organizations, Parties | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | Management and availability of sex-disaggregated data for gender analysis in national systems, as appropriate | National |
			
			
				Table 5
		Priority area E: monitoring and reporting
			| Activities | Responsibilities | Timeline | Deliverables/outputs | Level of implementation |
			| E.1 Strengthen the monitoring and reporting on women in leadership positions within the UNFCCC process in the context of the gender composition report referred to in paragraph 15(b) of this decision and including through case studies | Secretariat | Ongoing to COP 30 (2024) | Inclusion of additional information in gender composition report | International |
			| E.2 Monitor and report on the implementation of gender-responsive climate policies, plans, strategies and action, as appropriate, reported by Parties in regular reports and communications under the UNFCCC process | Secretariat | COP 28 (2022) COP 30 (2024) | Compilation and synthesis report | International |
			
			8th plenary meeting
15 December 2019
Decision 4/CP.25
Workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures
	The Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
	Recalling decisions 7/CP.24, 3/CMP.14 and 7/CMA.1,
	1.	Welcome the annual report of the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures and its progress in supporting the work of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures;
	2.	Adopt the rules of procedure of the Katowice Committee on Impacts as contained in annex I;
	3.	Adopt the workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee on Impacts as contained in annex II;
	4.	Decide that the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures, in the context of the implementation of the workplan, may consider, as needed, additional modalities for the workplan activities, consistent with the modalities identified in decision 7/CMA.1, and recommend such additional modalities for the workplan for consideration and adoption by the subsidiary bodies;
	5.	Recall paragraph 12 of decision 7/CMA.1, which provides that the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures shall provide recommendations for consideration by the subsidiary bodies with a view to the subsidiary bodies recommending actions to the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement for consideration and adoption;
	6.	Request the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures to continue considering the first annual report of the Katowice Committee on Impacts, including the recommendations and considerations contained therein, at the fifty-sixth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (June 2022) with a view to providing recommendations for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at their next sessions;
	7.	Also request the secretariat to support the implementation of the workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee on Impacts referred to in paragraph 3 above;
	8.	Take note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 3 above;
	9.	Request that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	
Annex I
	Rules of procedure of the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures
		I.	Scope
			1.	These rules of procedure shall apply to the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures (KCI) in accordance with decision 7/CMA.1 and its annex.
		II.	Mandate
			2.	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA), by decision 7/CMA.1, decided to establish the KCI to support the work of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures in implementing its work programme and operating in accordance with the terms of reference contained in the annex to that decision.
			3.	The forum and the KCI may use the following modalities, as appropriate and as decided on a case-by-case basis, to carry out the work programme of the forum:
				(a)	Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices;
				(b)	Preparing technical papers, case studies, specific examples and guidelines;
				(c)	Receiving inputs from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations;
				(d)	Organizing workshops.
		III.	Members
			4.	The CMA, by decision 7/CMA.1, decided that the KCI shall be composed of 14 members, of which:
				(a)	Two members from each of the five United Nations regional groups;
				(b)	One member from the least developed countries;
				(c)	One member from the small island developing States;
				(d)	Two members from relevant intergovernmental organizations.
			5.	By the same decision, the CMA also decided that members shall be nominated by their respective groups. Groups are encouraged to nominate members taking into account the goal of achieving gender balance. The Chairs of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) shall be notified of these appointments.
			6.	The CMA also decided that members shall serve in their expert capacity and should have relevant qualifications and expertise in the technical and socioeconomic fields related to the areas of the work programme of the forum.
			7.	Further, the CMA decided that members shall serve a term of two years and be eligible to serve a maximum of two consecutive terms in office.
			8.	The term of office of a member shall commence at the first meeting of the KCI in the calendar year of their appointment and end immediately before the first meeting of the KCI in the calendar year after their second calendar year in office.
			9.	If a member of the KCI resigns or is otherwise unable to complete the assigned term of office or to perform the functions of that office, the KCI shall request the group that nominated the member to nominate another member for the remainder of the unexpired term, in which case the appointment shall count as one term. In such a case, the KCI shall notify the Chairs of the SBSTA and the SBI.
			10.	If a member is unable to participate in two consecutive meetings of the KCI or unable to perform the functions and tasks set by the KCI, the Co-Chairs of the KCI will bring this matter to the attention of the KCI and seek clarification from the group that nominated that member on the status of their membership.
		IV.	Co-Chairs
			11.	The CMA decided that the KCI shall elect, on a consensus basis, two members from among its members to serve as Co-Chairs for a term of two years each, taking into account the need to ensure equitable geographical representation.
			12.	The CMA also decided that if one of the Co-Chairs is temporarily unable to fulfil the obligations of the office, another member designated by the KCI shall serve as Co-Chair.
			13.	If one of the Co-Chairs is unable to complete the term of office, the KCI shall elect a replacement from among its members of the relevant group of the incumbent Co-Chair, if available, to complete that term of office.
			14.	The Co-Chairs shall collaborate in chairing meetings of the KCI and in facilitating the work of the KCI throughout the year, in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI, to ensure coherence between meetings.
			15.	Following the completion of the Co-Chairs’ two-year term of office, the KCI shall nominate two members as Co-Chairs to serve the next two-year term of office.
			16.	The Co-Chairs shall declare the opening and closing of meetings of the KCI, ensure the observance of these rules of procedure and rule on points of order.
			17.	The Co-Chairs shall call upon speakers at meetings of the KCI in the order in which they signify their desire to speak. The secretariat shall maintain a list of speakers. The Co-Chairs may call a speaker to order if their remarks are not relevant to the subject under discussion.
			18.	The KCI may further define additional roles and responsibilities for the Co-Chairs.
			19.	In exercising their functions, the Co-Chairs shall remain under the authority of the KCI.
		V.	Secretariat
			20.	The secretariat shall support and facilitate the work of the KCI, by:
				(a)	Making the necessary arrangements for the meetings of the KCI, including announcing meetings, issuing invitations, making the necessary travel arrangements for members eligible for funding for their participation in meetings and making available relevant documents for meetings;
				(b)	Maintaining meeting records and arranging for the storage and preservation of documents of meetings of the KCI;
				(c)	Making documents of meetings of the KCI available to the public, unless otherwise decided by the KCI.
			21.	The secretariat shall assist the KCI in tracking its actions, in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI, in its annual report.
			22.	In addition, the secretariat shall perform any other functions assigned by the KCI, in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI.
		VI.	Meetings
			23.	The KCI shall meet twice per year, for two days per meeting, in conjunction with the sessions of the subsidiary bodies.
			24.	At least nine members of the KCI must be present to constitute a quorum.
			25.	Members are requested to confirm their attendance at meetings of the KCI as early as possible, and at least four weeks prior to a meeting for members eligible for funding for their participation, to enable sufficient time for the secretariat to make the necessary travel arrangements.
			26.	Should technical and financial resources permit, open meetings of the KCI shall be webcast through the UNFCCC website.
			27.	At each of its meetings, the KCI shall propose the dates of its next meeting. The Co-Chairs will agree the dates of the next meeting in consultation with the secretariat.
		VII.	Agenda and documentation for meetings
			28.	The Co-Chairs, assisted by the secretariat, shall prepare the provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda for each meeting of the KCI in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI. The Co-Chairs will prepare a report on the meeting, to be agreed by members, and this will be made available on the UNFCCC website. The Co-Chairs will report back to the forum on the meeting of the KCI.
			29.	The provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda for each meeting shall be transmitted to the members of the KCI at least four weeks in advance of the meeting.
			30.	Members may propose additions or changes to the provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda, in writing, to the secretariat within one week of receiving the documents, and these additions or changes shall be considered for a revised provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda by the secretariat in agreement with the Co-Chairs.
			31.	The secretariat shall transmit the provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda and any supporting documentation to the members at least two weeks prior to a meeting. Documents may be transmitted after that date with the approval of the Co-Chairs.
			32.	Documents for a meeting shall be published on the UNFCCC website at least two weeks prior to that meeting, to the extent possible.
			33.	The KCI shall, at the beginning of each meeting, adopt the agenda for that meeting.
			34.	The CMA decided that members of the KCI shall prepare an annual report for consideration by the forum with a view to making recommendations for consideration by the SBSTA and the SBI, which, in turn, are to recommend actions to the Conference of the Parties (COP), the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) and the CMA for their consideration and adoption.
			35.	This annual report shall be made available on the UNFCCC website before the relevant sessions of the COP, the CMP and the CMA.
		VIII.	Decision-making
			36.	The CMA decided that the KCI shall operate on the basis of consensus of its members.
			37.	The KCI may use electronic means to facilitate its work, as appropriate and in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI.
		IX.	Working language
			38.	The working language of the KCI shall be English.
		X.	Participation of expert advisers in meetings
			39.	The KCI, in performing its mandate, should draw upon outside expertise at its meetings.
			40.	The Co-Chairs may, in consultation with the KCI, invite representatives of international organizations, the private sector, academia and/or civil society to participate in a meeting of the KCI as expert advisers on specific issues under consideration at the meeting.
		XI.	Participation of observers
			41.	The CMA decided that meetings of the KCI shall be open to attendance as observers by all Parties and accredited observer organizations, unless otherwise decided by the KCI.
			42.	The KCI may decide to close a meeting or part thereof to observers at any time.
			43.	The secretariat shall make the dates and venues of the meetings available to the public to enable participation by observers.
			44.	Observers may, with the agreement of the KCI, be invited to address the KCI on matters under consideration by the KCI. The Co-Chairs shall notify the KCI one week in advance of the meeting of any proposed interventions by observers.
			45.	The KCI may request interventions from observers throughout the meeting, as appropriate.
		XII.	Use of electronic means of communication
			46.	The KCI shall use electronic means of communication to facilitate intersessional work, as appropriate and in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI. The secretariat shall ensure that a secure and dedicated web interface is established and maintained to facilitate the work of the KCI.
		XIII.	Working groups
			47.	The KCI may establish working groups among its members to support the forum in performing its functions. The working groups may receive inputs from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI and in line with paragraphs 39–40 above.
		XIV.	Workplan
			48.	The KCI will support the work of the forum in line with the workplan of the forum and its KCI.
		XV.	Amendments to the rules of procedure
			49.	The KCI may recommend amendments to these rules of procedure for consideration by the forum and approval by the subsidiary bodies.
			50.	Proposals and amendments to proposals for the rules of procedure may be introduced and submitted to the secretariat in writing by KCI members; such proposals and amendments shall be circulated for consideration by all members of the KCI.
			51.	No proposal for the rules of procedure shall be discussed or put forward for a decision at any meeting unless copies have been circulated to the KCI members no later than two weeks before the meeting.
		XVI.	Overriding authority of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement
			52.	In the event of a conflict between any provision of these rules and any provision of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol or the Paris Agreement, the provision of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol or the Paris Agreement shall take precedence.
	
	Annex II
	Workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures
		The Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement recall:
		(a)	Decision 7/CMA.1, paragraph 12, in which it was decided that the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures shall provide recommendations for consideration by the subsidiary bodies with a view to the subsidiary bodies recommending actions to the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement for consideration and adoption;
		(b)	Decision 7/CMA.1, annex, paragraph 4(j), in which it was decided that the members of the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures (KCI) shall prepare an annual report for consideration by the forum with a view to making recommendations to the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
		(c)	Decision 7/CMA.1, annex, paragraph 5, in which it was decided that the forum and its KCI may use the following modalities, as appropriate and as decided on a case-by-case basis, in order to carry out the work programme of the forum:
			(i)	Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices;
			(ii)	Preparing technical papers, case studies, concrete examples and guidelines;
			(iii)	Receiving input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations;
			(iv)	Organizing workshops;
		(d)	Decision 7/CMA.1, paragraph 10, in which the subsidiary bodies were requested to conduct a midterm review of the workplan of the forum;
		(e)	Decision 7/CMA.1, paragraph 9, in which it was decided that the forum shall develop and recommend a six-year workplan in line with the forum’s functions, work programme and modalities taking into account relevant policy issues of concern to Parties.
		Workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures (for the fifty-second to sixty-third sessions of the subsidiary bodies)
			| Activity numbera | Activity | Estimated timeline for implementation | Responsible actor | Modalities/outputs |
			| a | Provide capacity-building to the Chairs and members of UNFCCC constituted bodies and technical teams of the secretariat on how to integrate gender considerations into their respective areas of work and on meeting the goal of gender balance (decision 3/CP.23) | SB 52 (June 2020) | KCI | Workshop |
			| b | Consideration of the KCI annual report by the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures (decision 7/CMA.1, annex, para. 4(j)) | SB 53 (November 2020), SB 55 (November 2021), SB 57 (November 2022), SB 59 (November 2023), SB 61 (November 2024) and SB 63 (2025) | KCI | Prepare annual report |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Consider annual report |
			| c | Midterm review of this workplan, starting from SB 56 (June 2022) (decision 7/CMA.1, para. 10) | SB 56 | Forum | Conclusions/draft decisions |
			| d | Prepare information for the technical assessment component of the global stocktake related to the impacts of the implementation of response measures (decision 19/CMA.1, paras. 8 and 24) | SB 56 and SB 57 | Forum | Forward an outcome document for consideration in the technical assessment of the global stocktake |
			| e | Review of the functions, work programme and modalities of the forum at SB 59 (decision 7/CMA.1, para. 6) | SB 58 (June 2023) and SB 59 | Forum | Prepare guiding questions for the review Receive and consider the review |
			| 1 | Explore approaches to informing the development and implementation of climate change mitigation strategies, plans, policies and programmes, including nationally determined contributions and/or long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategies, that maximize the positive and minimize the negative impactsb of response measures | SB 52 | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Awareness-building and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices |
			| 2 | Identify country-driven strategies and best practices on just transition of the workforce and creation of decent work and quality jobs and on economic diversification and transformation focusing on challenges and opportunities from the implementation of low greenhouse gas emission policies and strategies towards the achievement of sustainable development | SB 54 (May–June 2021) and SB 58 | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Concrete examples |
			|  |  | SB 58 | Forum | Awareness-building and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices In-session workshop |
			| 3 | Facilitate the development, enhancement, customization and use of tools and methodologies for modelling and assessing the impacts of the implementation of response measures, including identifying and reviewing existing tools and approaches in data-poor environments, in consultation with technical experts, practitioners and other relevant stakeholders | SB 53 and onward, as decided by the forum/KCI | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Technical paper |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Awareness-building and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices Organizing a regional workshop |
			| 4 | Enhance the capacity and understanding of Parties, through collaboration and input from stakeholders, on the assessment and analysis of the impacts of the implementation of response measures to facilitate the undertaking of economic diversification and transformation and just transition | SB 52 and SB 63 | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Technical paper |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Awareness-building and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices |
			| 5 | Build awareness and understanding of Parties and other stakeholders to assess the economic impacts of potential new industries and businesses resulting from the implementation of response measures with a view to maximizing the positive and minimizing the negative impacts of the implementation of response measures | SB 57 | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Technical paper |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Awareness-building and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices |
			| 6 | Promote the availability and use of guidelines and policy frameworks to assist Parties in promoting just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs within and across sectors, including training, retooling, retraining and reskilling systems and stakeholder engagement strategies | SB 60 (June 2024) | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Exchange and sharing of experience and best practices |
			| 7 | Facilitate the development and exchange of regional, country- and/or sector-specific case studies and approaches on (1) economic diversification and transformation and just transition of the workforce and creation of decent work and quality jobs, and (2) assessment and analysis of the impacts of the implementation of response measures with a view to understanding the positive and negative impacts | SB 59 and onward, as decided by the forum/KCI | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations KCI to examine existing case studies and identify an area where it may develop a case study, as appropriate. |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Exchange and sharing of experience and best practices |
			| 8 | Identify and exchange experiences and best practices in engaging the private sector, including small and medium-sized enterprises and public–private partnerships, to facilitate the creation of decent work and quality jobs in low greenhouse gas emission sectors | SB 59 | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Technical paper |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Exchange and sharing of experience and best practices Concrete examples |
			| 9 | Identify and assess the impacts of the implementation of response measures taking into account intergenerational equity, gender considerations and the needs of local communities, indigenous peoples, youth and other people in vulnerable situations | SB 56 and SB 62 (2025) | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Technical paper |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Exchange and sharing of experience and best practices Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations In-session workshop |
			| 10 | Share experience and best practices in reporting and informing on efforts to assess and analyse the impacts of the implementation of response measures | SB 61 | KCI | Exchange and sharing of experience and best practices |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Exchange and sharing of experience and best practices Concrete examples |
			| 11 | Facilitate, exchange and share experiences and best practices in the assessment of the environmental, social and economic co-benefits of climate change policies and actions informed by the best available science, including the use of existing tools and methodologies | SB 55 and SB 57 | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Exchange and sharing of experience and best practices |
			
				a   Letters represent activities from previous decisions while numbers are new activities from this decision.
				b   “Impacts” in this document refers to social, economic and environmental impacts.
				Abbreviations: KCI = Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures, SB = sessions of the subsidiary bodies.
			8th plenary meeting
15 December 2019
				
	Decision 5/CP.25
	Scope of the second periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling the ultimate objective of the Convention, contained in its Article 2,
		Also recalling decisions 1/CP.16, 2/CP.17, 1/CP.18, 10/CP.21 and 18/CP.23,
		Further recalling decisions 1/CP.24, section V, and 19/CMA.1,
		1.	Recalls that pursuant to decision 1/CP.18, paragraph 79, the review should periodically assess, in accordance with the relevant principles and provisions of the Convention, the following:
			(a)	The adequacy of the long-term global goal in the light of the ultimate objective of the Convention;
			(b)	Overall progress made towards achieving the long-term global goal, including a consideration of the implementation of the commitments under the Convention;
		2.	Agrees that the second periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it will be conducted, in accordance with the scope as defined in paragraph 4 below, with the assistance of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, in an effective and efficient manner, avoiding duplication of work and taking into account the results of relevant work conducted under the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol, the Paris Agreement and the subsidiary bodies;
		3.	Notes that pursuant to decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 161, there is new information relevant to the second periodic review since the completion of the 2013–2015 review, and that additional information will be made available;
		4.	Decides that the second periodic review should, in accordance with the relevant principles and provisions of the Convention and on the basis of the best available science:
			(a)	Enhance Parties’ understanding of:
				(i)	The long-term global goal and scenarios towards achieving it in the light of the ultimate objective of the Convention;
				(ii)	Progress made in relation to addressing information and knowledge gaps, including with regard to scenarios to achieve the long-term global goal and the range of associated impacts, since the completion of the 2013–2015 review;
				(iii)	Challenges and opportunities for achieving the long-term global goal with a view to ensuring the effective implementation of the Convention;
			(b)	Assess the overall aggregated effect of the steps taken by Parties in order to achieve the long-term global goal in the light of the ultimate objective of the Convention;
		5.	Agrees that the outcome of the second periodic review will not result in an alteration or redefinition of the long-term global goal stated in decision 10/CP.21;
		6.	Decides that the second periodic review shall follow, mutatis mutandis, the modalities set out in paragraphs 80–90 of decision 1/CP.18, including a structured expert dialogue;
		7.	Also decides that the second periodic review shall start in the second half of 2020 and conclude in 2022, with the structured expert dialogue held in conjunction with sessions of the subsidiary bodies, starting at their fifty-third sessions (November 2020) and being completed at their fifty-fifth sessions (November 2021);
		8.	Further decides to consider the continuation of periodic reviews at its thirtieth session (November 2024) and take appropriate action, taking into account experience from the 2013–2015 review and the second periodic review, and the first global stocktake; potential overlaps and synergies between the periodic review, the global stocktake and other relevant processes under the Convention and the Paris Agreement; and the availability of new information relevant to the periodic review;
		9.	Notes that the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation have fulfilled the mandate contained in decisions 10/CP.21, paragraph 10, and 18/CP.23, paragraph 2.
		8th plenary meeting
15 December 2019
		
	Decision 6/CP.25
	Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
		The Conference of the Parties,
		Recalling the relevant provisions of the Convention, in particular Articles 4, 5, 6 and 12, and decisions 9/CP.2, 11/CP.4, 4/CP.5, 1/CP.16, 2/CP.17, 19/CP.18, 24/CP.19 and 9/CP.21, related to reporting from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, as well as decision 1/CP.24, paragraphs 39–43, related to the transparency framework for action and support referred to in Article 13 of the Paris Agreement,
		Also recalling its request to the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to revise the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications” based on the experiences gained in preparing the first biennial reports and other information,
		1.	Adopts the revised “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications” contained in the annex;
		2.	Decides that Parties included in Annex I to the Convention shall use the guidelines referred to in paragraph 1 above in preparing their national communications, beginning with the eighth national communications;
		3.	Also decides to change the due date for submission of the eighth national communications and the fifth biennial reports by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention from 1 January 2022 to as early as the annual greenhouse gas inventory submission for inventory year 2020 is provided to the UNFCCC, but no later than 31 December 2022, in order to provide Parties with the opportunity to include the inventory data in these reports;
		4.	Further decides that all references to decision 4/CP.5 in decision 1/CP.24 shall be read as references to decision 6/CP.25.
		
	Annex
	Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part II: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national communications
		I.	Objectives
			1.	The objectives of these guidelines are to:
				(a)	Assist Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties) in meeting their commitments under Articles 4 and 12 of the Convention;
				(b)	Promote the provision of consistent, transparent, comparable, accurate and complete information in order to enable a thorough review and assessment of the implementation of the Convention by Parties, and to monitor the progress that Annex I Parties are making towards meeting their goals under the Convention;
				(c)	Assist the Conference of the Parties (COP) in carrying out its responsibility to review the implementation of the Convention pursuant to its Article 7, paragraph 2(a), and the adequacy of the commitments under Article 4, paragraph 2(a) and (b), in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 2(d), of the Convention.
		II.	Executive summary
			2.	The national communication shall include an executive summary that summarizes the information and data contained in the full document. The executive summary shall consist of no more than 15 pages.
		III.	National circumstances relevant to greenhouse gas emissions and removals
			3.	Parties shall provide a description of their national circumstances, how the national circumstances affect greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and removals, and how the national circumstances and changes therein affect GHG emissions and removals over time. Parties should provide information on how their national circumstances are relevant to factors affecting GHG emissions and removals, including disaggregated indicators, to explain the relationship between the national circumstances and emissions or removals. Parties may provide whatever information best describes their own national circumstances and historical trends. However, in order to improve the comparability of national communications, reporting information under the following headings is recommended:
				(a)	Government structure: for example, roles and responsibilities of different levels of government and relevant interministerial decision-making processes or bodies;
				(b)	Population profile: for example, total population, density and distribution;
				(c)	Economic profile: for example, gross domestic product (GDP), GDP per capita (expressed in domestic currency and purchasing power parity), GDP by sector and international trade patterns;
				(d)	Geographical profile: for example, area, latitude, land use and ecosystems;
				(e)	Climate profile: for example, temperature distribution, annual temperature variation, precipitation distribution, climate variability and extreme events;
				(f)	Energy (by fuel type, where appropriate): for example, energy resource base, production, market structure, prices, taxes, subsidies and trade;
				(g)	Transportation: for example, modes (passenger and freight), travel distances and fleet characteristics;
				(h)	Industry: for example, structure;
				(i)	Waste: for example, waste sources and management practices;
				(j)	Building stock and urban structure: for example, profile of residential and commercial buildings;
				(k)	Agriculture: for example, structure and management practices;
				(l)	Forest: for example, types and management practices;
				(m)	Other circumstances.
			Flexibility in accordance with Article 4, paragraphs 6 and 10, of the Convention
				4.	Parties requesting flexibility or consideration in accordance with Article 4, paragraphs 6 and 10, of the Convention shall state the type of special consideration that they are seeking and provide a full explanation of their circumstances.
		IV.	Greenhouse gas inventory information
			A.	Summary tables
				5.	Summary information from the national GHG inventory prepared in accordance with the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part I: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual greenhouse gas inventories” (hereinafter referred to as the UNFCCC Annex I inventory reporting guidelines) (annex I to decision 24/CP.19 and any relevant decisions adopted subsequently by the COP) shall be provided for the period from 1990 (or another base year) to the latest year reported in the most recent annual inventory submission available (the most recent inventory year). The information provided in the national communication should be consistent with that provided in the most recent annual inventory submission available (for the year prior to the due date of submission of the national communication) and any differences should be fully explained.
				6.	For the purpose of the national communication, complete inventory information need not be provided. However, at a minimum, Parties shall report the summary of GHG emissions and removals, including the information expressed in carbon dioxide (CO2) equivalent in emission trend tables provided in the common reporting format contained in the UNFCCC Annex I inventory reporting guidelines. Parties may elect to replicate the information reported in the biennial report submitted with the national communication. The tables may be provided as an annex, as part of the national communication rather than in the main text.
			B.	Descriptive summary
				7.	In the main text of the national communication, Parties should provide a descriptive summary and figures illustrating the GHG emissions reported in the summary tables referred to in paragraph 6 above. Parties should provide a description of the factors underlying emission trends.
			C.	National inventory arrangements
				8.	Parties shall provide summary information on their national inventory arrangements in accordance with the reporting requirements related to national inventory arrangements contained in the UNFCCC Annex I inventory reporting guidelines and on any changes to those national inventory arrangements since their previous national communication or biennial report.
		V.	Policies and measures
			A.	Selection of policies and measures to be reported in the national communication
				9.	In accordance with Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Convention, Parties shall communicate information on policies and measures adopted to implement their commitments under Article 4, paragraph 2(a) and (b), of the Convention, which need not have the limitation or reduction of GHG emissions or the enhancement of removals as a primary objective.
				10.	In their reporting, Parties should give priority to policies and measures, or combinations of policies and measures, that have the most significant impact on GHG emissions and removals, and they may also indicate those that are innovative and/or effectively replicable by other Parties. Parties may report on adopted policies and measures and those in the planning stage, but should clearly distinguish them from implemented policies and measures. The national communication does not have to report every policy and measure that affects GHG emissions.
				11.	Policies and measures reported on should be: those implemented (those for which one or more of the following applies: (1) national legislation is in force; (2) one or more voluntary agreements have been established; (3) financial resources have been allocated; and (4) human resources have been mobilized); those adopted (those for which an official government decision has been made and there is a clear commitment to proceed with implementation); and/or those planned (options under discussion or announced and with a realistic chance of being adopted and implemented in the future) by governments at the national, state, provincial, regional and local levels, as applicable. Furthermore, policies and measures reported may also include those adopted in the context of regional or international efforts.
				12.	Parties should report on actions taken to implement their commitments under Article 4, paragraph 2(e)(ii), of the Convention, which requires them to identify and periodically update their own policies and practices that encourage activities that lead to greater levels of anthropogenic GHG emissions than would otherwise occur. Parties should also provide the rationale for such actions in the context of their national communications.
				13.	Parties are encouraged to provide, to the extent possible, detailed information on the assessment of the economic and social consequences of response measures.
			B.	Structure of the policies and measures section of the national communication
				14.	Parties shall organize the reporting on policies and measures by sector, indicating which GHGs (CO2, methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) and nitrogen trifluoride (NF3)) are affected by which policies and measures. To the extent appropriate, the following sectors should be considered: energy, transport, industry/industrial processes and product use, agriculture, forestry/land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF), waste management/waste, other sectors and cross-cutting. Each sector shall have its own textual description of the significant policies and measures, as set out in section D below, supplemented by table 1 below. Parties may include separate text describing cross-sectoral policies and measures. Policies and measures influencing GHG emissions from international transport should be reported under the transport sector.
				15.	In cases where a policy or measure has been maintained over time and is thoroughly described in a Party’s previous national communication and/or biennial report, reference should be made to it and only a brief description contained in the latest national communication, focusing on any alterations to the policy or measure or effects achieved.
				16.	Some information, such as the effect of policies and measures, may be presented in aggregate for several complementary measures in a particular sector or affecting a particular gas.
			C.	Policymaking process
				17.	The national communication should describe the overall policy context, including any national targets for GHG mitigation. Strategies for sustainable development, long-term mitigation strategies or other relevant policy objectives may also be covered.
				18.	The national communication should provide a description of the way in which progress with policies and measures to mitigate GHG emissions is monitored and evaluated over time. Institutional arrangements for the monitoring of GHG mitigation policy should also be reported in this context.
			D.	Policies and measures and their effects
				19.	The presentation of each policy or measure shall include information on each of the subject headings listed below. The presentation of each policy or measure should be concise and include the details suggested after each subject heading as follows:
					(a)	Name of policy or measure;
					(b)	Sector(s) affected. To the extent possible, the following sectors should be used: energy, transport, industry/industrial processes and product use, agriculture, forestry/LULUCF, waste management/waste, other sectors and cross-cutting, as appropriate;
					(c)	The GHG(s) affected;
					(d)	Objective and/or activity affected. The description of the objectives should focus on the key purposes and benefits of the policy or measure, including a description of activities and/or source and sink categories affected. Objectives should be described in quantitative terms, to the extent possible;
					(e)	Type of instrument. To the extent possible, the following terms should be used: economic, fiscal, voluntary agreement, regulatory, information, education, research or other;
					(f)	Status of implementation. It should be noted whether the policy or measure is no longer in place, in the planning stage, has been adopted or is under implementation. For adopted and implemented measures, additional information may include the funds already provided, future budget allocated and the time frame for implementation;
					(g)	Brief description of the policy or measure;
					(h)	Start year of implementation;
					(i)	Implementing entity or entities. This should describe the role of national, state, provincial, regional and local governments and the involvement of any other entities;
					(j)	Estimate of mitigation impact (for a particular year, not cumulative, in kt CO2 eq).
				20.	In the description of each policy or measure or set of complementary measures reported, Parties shall include, as appropriate, a quantitative estimate of the impact of individual policies or measures or collections of policies and measures (if such estimation is not possible, Parties shall explain why), including estimated changes in activity levels and/or emissions and removals due to adopted and implemented policies and measures reported and a brief description of estimation methods. Estimates should be presented for a particular year, ending in either a zero or a five, following the most recent inventory year.
				21.	Parties may also provide information under the following headings for each policy or measure reported:
					(a)	Information on costs of policy or measure. Such information should be accompanied by a brief definition of the term ‘cost’ in this context;
					(b)	Information on non-GHG mitigation benefits. Such benefits may include, for example, reduced emissions of other pollutants, or health benefits;
					(c)	Information on how it interacts with other policies and measures at the national level. This may include a description of how policies complement each other in order to enhance overall GHG mitigation.
				22.	In the light of the information provided in paragraph 34 below, Parties shall provide information on how they believe their policies and measures are modifying longer-term trends in anthropogenic GHG emissions and removals consistent with the objective of the Convention.
			E.	Policies and measures no longer in place
				23.	When policies and measures listed in previous national communications are no longer in place, Parties may explain why this is so.
				
				Table 1
				Summary of policies and measures by sector
					| Name of policy or measurea | Sector(s) affectedb | GHG(s) affected | Objective and/or activity affected | Type of instrumentc | Status of implementationd | Brief descriptione | Start year of implementation | Implementing entity or entities | Estimate of mitigation impact (not cumulative, in kt CO2 eq) |
					|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 20XXf | 2020 |
					|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
					|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
					
						Note: The two final columns specify the year identified by the Party for estimating impacts (based on the status of the measure and whether an ex post or ex ante estimation is available).
						Abbreviation: GHG = greenhouse gas.
						a   Parties should use an asterisk (*) to indicate that the policy or measure is included in the ‘with measures’ projection.
						b   To the extent possible, the following sectors should be used: energy, transport, industry/industrial processes and product use, agriculture, forestry/land use, land-use change and forestry, waste management/waste, other sectors and cross-cutting, as appropriate.
						c   To the extent possible, the following types of instrument should be referred to: economic, fiscal, voluntary agreement, regulatory, information, education, research and other.
						d   To the extent possible, the following descriptive terms should be used to report on the status of implementation: implemented, adopted and planned.
						e   Additional information may be provided on the cost of the policy or measure and the relevant timescale.
						f   Optional year or years deemed relevant by the Party.
					
					
		VI.	Projections and total effect of policies and measures
			A.	Purpose
				24.	The primary objective of the projections section of the national communication is to give an indication of future trends in GHG emissions and removals, given current national circumstances and implemented and adopted policies and measures, and to give an indication of the path of emissions and removals without such policies and measures.
			B.	Projections
				25.	At a minimum, Parties shall report a ‘with measures’ projection, in accordance with paragraph 26 below, and may report ‘without measures’ and ‘with additional measures’ projections.
				26.	A ‘with measures’ projection shall encompass currently implemented and adopted policies and measures. If provided, a ‘with additional measures’ projection also encompasses planned policies and measures. If provided, a ‘without measures’ projection excludes all policies and measures implemented, adopted or planned after the year chosen as the starting point for that projection. In their reporting, Parties may refer to their ‘without measures’ projection as a ‘baseline’ or ‘reference’ projection, for example, if preferred, but should explain the nature of that projection.
				27.	Parties may report a sensitivity analysis for any of the projections, but should aim to limit the number of scenarios presented. Parties may provide the results of a sensitivity analysis for the reported GHG emissions together with a brief explanation of the methodologies and parameters used.
			C.	Presentation of projections relative to actual data
				28.	Emission projections shall be presented relative to actual inventory data for the preceding years.
				29.	For the ‘with measures’ and ‘with additional measures’ projections, the starting point should generally be the most recent inventory year. Parties may provide a ‘without measures’ projection starting from an earlier year.
				30.	Parties should present their projections relative to unadjusted inventory data for the preceding years presented in the most recent annual inventory submission available. In addition, Parties may present their projections relative to adjusted inventory data. In that case, Parties shall explain the nature of the adjustments.
			D.	Coverage and presentation
				31.	Projections shall be presented on a sectoral basis. To the extent possible, the sectoral categories used should be the same as in the GHG inventories.
				32.	Projections shall be presented on a gas-by-gas basis for the following GHGs: CO2, CH4, N2O, PFCs, HFCs, SF6 and NF3 (treating PFCs and HFCs collectively in each case). Parties may also provide projections of indirect emissions of carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxide and non-methane volatile organic compounds, as well as sulphur oxide. In addition, projections shall be provided in an aggregated format for each sector as well as for a national total, using global warming potential values agreed upon by the COP.
				33.	To ensure consistency with inventory reporting, emission projections related to fuel sold to ships and aircraft engaged in international transport shall, to the extent possible, be reported separately and not included in the national total.
				34.	In view of the objective of the Convention and the intent to modify longer-term trends in emissions and removals, Parties should include information on historical emissions and removals on a quantitative basis for the period from 1990 (or another base year, as appropriate) to the most recent inventory year. The information should be presented for 1990 (and another base year, as appropriate), 1995, 2000, 2005, 2010 and subsequent years that end in either a zero or a five up to the most recent inventory year. Parties should include projections on a quantitative basis, starting from the most recent inventory year and for subsequent years that end in either a zero or a five, extending at least 15 years from the most recent inventory year (e.g. 2020, 2025, 2030 and 2035). Projections and information on historical emissions and removals should be presented in tabular format. The tabular format used shall be as in tables 2, 3 and 4 below. For Parties using a base year other than 1990 for their GHG inventories, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Convention, inventory data for that year shall be given.
				
				
				Table 2
				Information on updated greenhouse gas projections under a ‘with measures’ scenarioa
				|  | GHG emissions and removalsb, c
(kt CO2 eq) | GHG emission projectionsc, d 
(kt CO2 eq) |
				|  | Base year | 1990 | 1995 | 2000 | 2005 | 2010 | … | 20XXe | 20YYf | … | … | … |
				| Sectorg, h |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Energy |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Transport |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Industry/industrial processes and product use |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Agriculture |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Forestry/LULUCF  Waste management/waste |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Other (specify) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Gas |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| CO2 emissions including net CO2 from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| CO2 emissions excluding net CO2 from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| CH4 emissions including CH4 from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| CH4 emissions excluding CH4 from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| N2O emissions including N2O from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| N2O emissions excluding N2O from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| HFCs |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| PFCs |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| SF6 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Other (specify, e.g. NF3) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Total with LULUCFi |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Total without LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				
					Abbreviations: GHG = greenhouse gas, LULUCF = land use, land-use change and forestry.
					a   In accordance with paragraph 25 of these guidelines, at a minimum Parties shall report a ‘with measures’ projection and they may also report ‘without measures’ and ‘with additional measures’ projections. If a Party chooses to report a ‘without measures’ and/or ‘with additional measures’ projection, it is to use table 3 and/or 4 below, respectively. If a Party does not choose to report a ‘without measures’ or ‘with additional measures’ projection, then it should not include table 3 or 4 in its national communication.
					b   Emissions and removals reported in these columns should be as reported in the most recent annual inventory submission available and consistent with the emissions and removals reported in the table on GHG emissions and trends provided in accordance with section IV of these guidelines. Where the sectoral breakdown differs from that reported in the GHG inventory, Parties should explain in their national communication how the inventory sectors relate to the sectors reported in this table.
					c   Parties may include indirect CO2 emissions in historical GHG emissions and in GHG emission projections and shall indicate this in a custom footnote below.
					d   Parties should include projections on a quantitative basis starting from the most recent inventory year and for subsequent years that end in either a zero or a five, extending at least 15 years from the most recent inventory year.
					e   The most recent inventory year.
					f   A year that ends in either a zero or a five following the most recent inventory year, extending at least 15 years from the most recent inventory year.
					g   In accordance with paragraph 31 of these guidelines, projections shall be presented on a sectoral basis, to the extent possible, using the same sectoral categories as used in the GHG inventories. This table should follow, to the extent possible, the same sectoral categories as those listed in paragraph 14 of these guidelines; namely, to the extent appropriate, the following sectors should be considered: energy, transport, industry/industrial processes and product use, agriculture, forestry/LULUCF, waste management/waste, other sectors and cross-cutting.
					h   To the extent possible, the following sectors should be used: energy, transport, industry/industrial processes and product use, agriculture, forestry/LULUCF, waste management/waste and other sectors (i.e. cross-cutting), as appropriate.
					i   Parties may choose to report total emissions with or without LULUCF, as appropriate.
					
				Table 3
				Information on updated greenhouse gas projections under a ‘without measures’ scenarioa
				|  | GHG emissions and removalsb, c (kt CO2 eq) | GHG emissions and removalsc, d (kt CO2 eq) |
				|  | Base year | 1990 | 1995 | 2000 | 2005 | 2010 | … | 20XXe | 20YYf | 20ZZg | … | … | … |
				| Sectorh, i |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Energy |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Transport |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Industry/industrial processes and product use |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Agriculture |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Forestry/LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Waste management/waste |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Other (specify) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Gas |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| CO2 emissions including net CO2 from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| CO2 emissions excluding net CO2 from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| CH4 emissions including CH4 from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| CH4 emissions excluding CH4 from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| N2O emissions including N2O from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| N2O emissions excluding N2O from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| HFCs |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| PFCs |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| SF6 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Other (specify, e.g. NF3) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Total with LULUCFj |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Total without LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				
					Abbreviations: GHG = greenhouse gas, LULUCF = land use, land-use change and forestry.
					a   In accordance with paragraph 25 of these guidelines, at a minimum Parties shall report a ‘with measures’ projection and they may also report ‘without measures’ and ‘with additional measures’ projections. If a Party chooses to report ‘without measures’ and/or ‘with additional measures’ projection, they are to use table 3 and/or 4 below, respectively. If a Party does not choose to report ‘without measures’ or ‘with additional measures’ projections, then it should not include table 3 or 4 in the national communication.
					b   Emissions and removals reported in these columns should be as reported in the most recent annual inventory submission available and consistent with the emissions and removals reported in the table on GHG emissions and trends provided in accordance with section IV of these guidelines. Where the sectoral breakdown differs from that reported in the GHG inventory, Parties should explain in their national communication how the inventory sectors relate to the sectors reported in this table.
					c   Parties may include indirect CO2 emissions in historical GHG emissions and in GHG emission projections and shall indicate this in a custom footnote below.
					d   Parties should include projections on a quantitative basis starting from the most recent inventory year (or an earlier year followed by the most recent inventory year) and for subsequent years that end in either a zero or a five, extending at least 15 years from the most recent inventory year.
					e   The starting year of the projections.
					f   The most recent inventory year, in the case that the projections are started from an earlier year.
					g   A year that ends in either a zero or a five, following the most recent inventory year, extending at least 15 years from the most recent inventory year.
					h   In accordance with paragraph 31 of these guidelines, projections shall be presented on a sectoral basis, to the extent possible, using the same sectoral categories used in the GHG inventories. This table should follow, to the extent possible, the same sectoral categories as those listed in paragraph 14 of these guidelines; namely, to the extent appropriate, the following sectors should be considered: energy, transport, industry/industrial processes and product use, agriculture, forestry/LULUCF, waste management/waste, other sectors and cross-cutting.
					i   To the extent possible, the following sectors should be used: energy, transport, industry/industrial processes and product use, agriculture, forestry/LULUCF, waste management/waste, other sectors (i.e. cross-cutting), as appropriate.
					j   Parties may choose to report total emissions with or without LULUCF, as appropriate.
					k   
					
				
				Table 4
				Information on updated greenhouse gas projections under a ‘with additional measures’ scenarioa
				|  | GHG emissions and removalsb, c (kt CO2 eq) |  | GHG emission projectionsc, d (kt CO2 eq) |
				|  | Base year | 1990 | 1995 | 2000 | 2005 | 2010 | … | 20XXe | 20YYf | … | … | … |
				| Sectorg,h |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Energy |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Transport |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Industry/industrial processes and product use |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Agriculture |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Forestry/LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Waste management/waste |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Other (specify) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Gas |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| CO2 emissions including net CO2 from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| CO2 emissions excluding net CO2 from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| CH4 emissions including CH4 from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| CH4 emissions excluding CH4 from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| N2O emissions including N2O from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| N2O emissions excluding N2O from LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| HFCs |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| PFCs |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| SF6 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Other (specify, e.g. NF3) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Total with LULUCFi |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Total without LULUCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				
					Abbreviations: GHG = greenhouse gas, LULUCF = land use, land-use change and forestry.
					a   In accordance with paragraph 25 of these guidelines, at a minimum Parties shall report a ‘with measures’ projection and they may also report ‘without measures’ and ‘with additional measures’ projections. If a Party chooses to report ‘without measures’ and/or ‘with additional measures’ projections, they are to use table 3 and/or 4 below, respectively. If a Party does not choose to report ‘without measures’ or ‘with additional measures’ projections, then it should not include table 3 or 4 in the national communication.
					b   Emissions and removals reported in these columns should be as reported in the most recent annual inventory submission available and consistent with the emissions and removals reported in the table on GHG emissions and trends provided in accordance with section IV of these guidelines. Where the sectoral breakdown differs from that reported in the GHG inventory, Parties should explain in their national communication how the inventory sectors relate to the sectors reported in this table.
					c   Parties may include indirect CO2 emissions in historical GHG emissions and in GHG emission projections and shall indicate this in a custom footnote below.
					d   Parties should include projections on a quantitative basis starting from the most recent inventory year and for subsequent years that end in either a zero or a five, extending at least 15 years from the most recent inventory year.
					e   The most recent inventory year.
					f   A year that ends in either a zero or a five, following the most recent inventory year, extending at least 15 years from the most recent inventory year.
					g   In accordance with paragraph 31 of these guidelines, projections shall be presented on a sectoral basis, to the extent possible, using the same sectoral categories used in the GHG inventories. This table should follow, to the extent possible, the same sectoral categories as those listed in paragraph 14 of these guidelines; namely, to the extent appropriate, the following sectors should be considered: energy, transport, industry/industrial processes and product use, agriculture, forestry/LULUCF, waste management/waste, other sectors and cross-cutting.
					h   To the extent possible, the following sectors should be used: energy, transport, industry/industrial processes and product use, agriculture, forestry/LULUCF, waste management/waste, other sectors (i.e. cross-cutting), as appropriate.
					i   Parties may choose to report total emissions with or without LULUCF, as appropriate.
				
				
					35.	Figures illustrating the information referred to in paragraphs 31–34 above should be presented showing unadjusted inventory data and a ‘with measures’ projection for the period from 1990 (or another base year, as appropriate) to the most recent inventory year and for subsequent years that end in either a zero or a five, extending at least 15 years from the most recent inventory year. Additional figures may also be presented. The figure below illustrates the presentation of a hypothetical Party’s projection of emissions. It shows unadjusted inventory data for the period from 1990 to the most recent inventory year and ‘with measures’, ‘with additional measures’ and ‘without measures’ projections.
				Hypothetical Party’s projection of emissions
					
			E.	Assessment of aggregate effect of policies and measures
				36.	The estimated and expected effects of individual policies and measures are addressed in the policies and measures section of the national communication. In the projections section of the national communication, Parties shall present the estimated and expected total effect of implemented and adopted policies and measures. Parties may also present the total expected effect of planned policies and measures.
				37.	Parties shall provide an estimate of the total effect of their policies and measures, in accordance with the ‘with measures’ definition, compared with a situation without such policies and measures. That effect shall be presented in terms of GHG emissions avoided or sequestered, by gas (on a CO2 eq basis), in the most recent inventory year and in subsequent years that end in either a zero or a five, extending at least 15 years from the most recent inventory year (not cumulative savings). This information may be presented in tabular format.
				38.	Parties may estimate the total effect of their measures by calculating the difference between a ‘with measures’ and a ‘without measures’ projection. Alternatively, Parties may use another approach, for example individually assessing the effect of each significant policy and measure and aggregating the individual effects to arrive at a total. In either case, in the reporting it should be clear from what year onward it was assumed that policies were implemented or not implemented in calculating the estimate.
			F.	Methodology
				39.	When projecting GHG emissions and removals and estimating the total effects of policies and measures on emissions and removals, Parties may use any models and/or approaches that they choose. Sufficient information should be reported in the national communication to allow a reader to obtain a basic understanding of such models and/or approaches.
				40.	In the interest of transparency, for each model or approach used, Parties should briefly:
					(a)	Explain for which gases and/or sectors it was used;
					(b)	Describe its type and characteristics (for example, top-down model, bottom-up model, accounting model or expert judgment);
					(c)	Describe the original purpose that it was designed for and, if applicable, how it has been modified for climate change purposes;
					(d)	Summarize its strengths and weaknesses;
					(e)	Explain how it accounts for any overlap or synergies that may exist between different policies and measures.
				41.	Parties should provide references to more detailed information related to the information referred to in paragraph 40(a–e) above.
				42.	Parties should report the main differences in assumptions, methods employed and results between the projections reported in the current national communication and those reported in previous national communications.
				43.	The sensitivity of the projections to underlying assumptions should be discussed qualitatively and, where possible, quantitatively.
				44.	To ensure transparency, Parties should report information on key underlying assumptions and values of variables such as GDP growth, population growth, tax levels and international fuel prices, using table 5 below. The information should be limited to that not covered by paragraph 45 below (i.e. it should not include sector-specific data).
				45.	To provide the reader with an understanding of emission trends from 1990 to at least 15 years from the most recent inventory year, Parties shall present relevant information on factors and activities for each sector. Such information may be presented in tabular format.
				
					Table 5
					Summary of key variables and assumptions used in the projections analysisa
				|  | Historicalb | Projected |
				| Key underlying assumptions | 1990 | 1995 | 2000 | 2005 | 2010 |  | … |  | 20XXc |  | 20YYd | … | … |  |  |
				|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				
					a   Parties should include key underlying assumptions, as appropriate.
					b   Parties should include the historical data used to develop the greenhouse gas emission projections reported.
					c   The most recent inventory year.
					d   A year that ends in either a zero or a five following the most recent inventory year, extending at least 15 years from the most recent inventory year.
					
				
		VII.	Vulnerability assessment, climate change impacts and adaptation measures
			46.	The national communication shall include information on the expected impacts of climate change and an outline of the action taken to implement Article 4, paragraph 1(b) and (e), of the Convention with regard to adaptation. Parties are encouraged to use and reference relevant methodologies and guidance for assessing climate change impacts, vulnerability and adaptation measures. Parties may refer, inter alia, to integrated plans for coastal zone management, water resources and agriculture. Parties may also report on specific results of scientific research in the field of vulnerability assessment and adaptation.
			47.	Parties are encouraged to use the following structure when reporting information in this section:
				(a)	Climate modelling, projections and scenarios: for example, updated information on climate modelling, climate projections and scenarios relevant to the assessment of climate change impacts and vulnerability;
				(b)	Assessment of risks and vulnerability to climate change: for example, updated information on key economic, social and/or environmental vulnerabilities or risks related to current and expected climate change impacts;
				(c)	Climate change impacts: for example, updated information on both observed and potential future impacts of climate change;
				(d)	Domestic adaptation policies and strategies: for example, updated information on progress on adaptation policies, strategies or plans that illustrate the Party’s medium- and long-term approaches to addressing risks and vulnerability through its broader domestic development and sectoral planning;
				(e)	Monitoring and evaluation framework: for example, updated information on approaches to the monitoring and evaluation of implemented adaptation strategies or plans;
				(f)	Progress and outcomes of adaptation action: for example, updated information on adaptation measures taken to address current risks and vulnerabilities and on their status of implementation; and updated information on progress and, where possible, outcomes and the effectiveness of already implemented adaptation measures.
		VIII.	Financial, technological and capacity-building support
			48.	Parties included in Annex II to the Convention (Annex II Parties) shall provide information on the provision of financial, technological and capacity-building support to Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties), including information to show how this support is new and additional. In reporting such information, Parties should distinguish, to the extent possible, between support provided to non-Annex I Parties for mitigation and adaptation activities, noting the capacity-building elements of such activities, where relevant. For activities with multiple objectives, the funding could be reported as a contribution allocated partially to the other relevant objectives.
			49.	Each Annex II Party shall provide a description of its national approach to the tracking of the provision of financial, technological and capacity-building support to non-Annex I Parties, if appropriate. This description shall also include information on indicators and delivery mechanisms used and allocation channels tracked.
			50.	In reporting information in accordance with paragraphs 52 and 53 below, Annex II Parties shall use any methodology to be developed under the Convention, taking into account international experience. Annex II Parties shall describe the methodology used and shall report in a rigorous, robust and transparent manner the underlying assumptions and methodologies used to produce information on finance.
			A.	Finance
				51.	Each Annex II Party shall describe, to the extent possible, how it seeks to ensure that the resources it provides effectively address the needs of non-Annex I Parties with regard to climate change adaptation and mitigation.
				52.	Each Annex II Party shall provide information on the financial support that it has disbursed and committed for the purpose of assisting non-Annex I Parties to mitigate GHG emissions and adapt to the adverse effects of climate change and any economic and social consequences of response measures, and for capacity-building and technology transfer in the areas of mitigation and adaptation, where appropriate. To that end, each Annex II Party shall provide summary information in textual and tabular format (see tables 6, 7 and 8 below) on allocation channels and annual contributions for the previous two calendar or financial years, without overlapping with the previous reporting periods, including, as appropriate, the following:
					(a)	The Global Environment Facility, the Least Developed Countries Fund, the Special Climate Change Fund, the Adaptation Fund, the Green Climate Fund and the UNFCCC Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities;
					(b)	Other multilateral climate change funds;
					(c)	Multilateral financial institutions, including regional development banks;
					(d)	Specialized United Nations bodies;
					(e)	Contributions through bilateral, regional and other channels.
				53.	Each Annex II Party shall provide the summary information referred to in paragraph 52 above for the previous two calendar or financial years in textual and tabular format on the annual financial support that it has provided for the purpose of assisting non-Annex I Parties, including the following:
					(a)	The amount of financial resources (including the amount in original currency and its equivalent in United States dollars/international currency);
					(b)	The type of support (for mitigation and adaptation activities);
					(c)	The source of funding;
					(d)	The financial instrument;
					(e)	The sector;
					(f)	An indication of what new and additional financial resources it has provided pursuant to Article 4, paragraph 3, of the Convention, including clarification of how it has determined that such resources are new and additional.
				54.	Each Annex II Party shall provide detailed information on the assistance provided by it for the purpose of assisting developing country Parties that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change in meeting the costs of adaptation to those adverse effects, in textual format and with reference to table 6 below.
				55.	Recognizing that the goal of mobilizing financial resources referred to in decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 98, includes private financial sources, each Annex II Party should report, to the extent possible, on private financial flows leveraged by bilateral climate finance towards mitigation and adaptation activities in non-Annex I Parties, and should report on policies and measures that promote the scaling up of private investment in mitigation and adaptation activities in developing country Parties.
				56.	Each Annex II Party should specify the types of instrument used in the provision of their assistance, such as grants and concessional loans.
				
				
					Table 6
					Provision of public financial support: summary information in 20XX-3a
				|  |  |  | Year |  |
				| Allocation channel | Domestic currency |  | USDb |
				|  | Core/ generalc, 1 | Climate-specificd, 2 |  | Core/ generalc | Climate-specificd,2 |
				|  |  | Mitigation | Adaptation | Cross-cuttinge | Otherf |  |  | Mitigation | Adaptation | Cross-cuttinge | Otherf |
				| Total contributions through multilateral channels: Multilateral climate change fundsg |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Other multilateral climate change fundsh |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Multilateral financial institutions, including regional development banks |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Specialized United Nations bodies |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Total contributions through bilateral, regional and other channels |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Total |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				
					Note: Explanation of numerical footnotes is provided in the documentation box after tables 6, 7 and 8.
					a   Parties should fill in a separate table for each year, namely 20XX-3 and 20XX-2, where 20XX is the reporting year.
					b   Parties should provide an explanation of the methodology used for currency exchange for the information provided in tables 6, 7 and 8 in the documentation box.
					c   This refers to support provided to multilateral institutions that Parties cannot specify as being climate-specific.
					d   Parties should explain in their national communication how they define funds as being climate-specific.
					e   This refers to funding for activities that are cross-cutting across mitigation and adaptation.
					f   Please specify.
					g   Multilateral climate change funds listed in paragraph 52(a) of these guidelines.
					h   Other multilateral climate change funds as referred to in paragraph 52(b) of these guidelines.
				Table 7
				Provision of public financial support: contributions through multilateral channels in 20XX-3a
				| Donor funding | Total amount | Statusb, 3 | Funding source4 | Financial instrument5 | Type of 
support6 | Sectorc, 7 |
				|  | Core/generald, 1 | Climate-specifice, 2 | Committed
Disbursed | ODA
OOF
Otherf | Grant Concessional loan Non-concessional loan Equity
Otherf | Mitigation
Adaptation 
Cross-cuttingg
Otherf | Energy
Transport
Industry
Agriculture Forestry
Water and sanitation Cross-cutting
Otherf
Not applicable |
				|  | Domestic currency | USD | Domestic currency | USD |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Multilateral climate change funds 1.  Global Environment Facility 2.  Least Developed Countries Fund 3.  Special Climate Change Fund 4.  Adaptation Fund 5.  Green Climate Fund 6.  UNFCCC Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities 7.  Other multilateral climate change funds |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Subtotal |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Multilateral financial institutions, including regional development banks 1.  World Bank 2.  International Finance Corporation 3.  African Development Bank 4.  Asian Development Bank 5.  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 6.  Inter-American Development Bank                           7.  Other |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Subtotal |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Specialized United Nations bodies 1.  United Nations Development Programme
     (specific programmes) 2. United Nations Environment Programme 
    (specific programmes)  3. Other |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Subtotal |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				| Total |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
				
					Note: Explanation of numerical footnotes is provided in the documentation box after tables 6, 7 and 8.
					Abbreviations: ODA = official development assistance, OOF = other official flows.
					a   Parties should fill in a separate table for each year, namely 20XX-3 and 20XX-2, where 20XX is the reporting year.
					b   Parties should explain, in their national communication, the methodologies used to specify the funds as disbursed and committed. Parties will provide the information for as many status categories as appropriate in the following order of priority: disbursed and committed.
					c   Parties may select several applicable sectors. Parties may report sectoral distribution, as applicable, under “Other”.
					d   This refers to support provided to multilateral institutions that Parties cannot specify as being climate-specific.
					e   Parties should explain in their national communication how they define funds as being climate-specific.
					f   Please specify.
					g   This refers to funding for activities that are cross-cutting across mitigation and adaptation.
				
					
						Table 8
						Provision of public financial support: contributions through bilateral, regional and other channels in 20XX-3a
					| Recipient country/
region/project/programme/activityb | Total amount | Statusc, 3 | Funding source4 | Financial instrument5 | Type of
 support6 | Sector,d, 7 | Additional informatione |
					|  | Climate-specificf, 2 | Committed
Disbursed | ODA
OOF
Otherg | Grant
Concessional loan Non-concessional loan Equity
Otherg | Mitigation
Adaptation
Cross-cuttingh Otherg | Energy
Transport
Industry
Agriculture
Forestry
Water and sanitation
Cross-cutting
Otherg |  |
					|  | Domestic currency | USD |  |  |  |  |  |  |
					|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
					|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
					|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
					|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
					|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
					|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
					|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
					
						Note: Explanation of numerical footnotes is provided in the documentation box after tables 6, 7 and 8.
						Abbreviations: ODA = official development assistance, OOF = other official flows.
						Parties should fill in a separate table for each year, namely 20XX-3 and 20XX-2, where 20XX is the reporting year.
						a   Parties should report, to the extent possible, on the details contained in this table.
							b   Parties should explain, in their national communication, the methodologies used to specify the funds as disbursed and committed. Parties will provide the information for as many status categories as appropriate in the following order of priority: disbursed and committed.
						c   Parties may select several applicable sectors. Parties may report sectoral distribution, as applicable, under “Other”.
						d   Parties should report, as appropriate, on project details and the implementing agency.
						e   Parties should explain in their national communication how they define funds as being climate-specific.
						f   Please specify.
						g   This refers to funding for activities that are cross-cutting across mitigation and adaptation.
						
					
				Documentation box
					| 1: Core/general |
					|  |
					| 2: Climate-specific |
					|  |
					| 3: Status |
					|  |
					| 4: Funding source |
					|  |
					| 5: Financial instrument |
					|  |
					| 6: Type of support |
					|  |
					| 7: Sector |
					|  |
					| Each Party shall provide an indication of what new and additional financial resources it has provided and clarify how it has determined that such resources are new and additional. Please provide this information in relation to tables 7 and 8 |
					|  |
					
					
					
			B.	Technology development and transfer
				57.	Each Annex II Party shall provide information on measures taken to promote, facilitate and finance the transfer of, access to and the deployment of climate-friendly technologies for the benefit of non-Annex I Parties and for the support of the development and enhancement of endogenous capacities and technologies of non-Annex I Parties. Parties shall, where feasible, report activities related to technology transfer, including success and failure stories, using table 9 below.
				58.	Each Annex II Party shall provide, in textual and tabular formats (see table 10 below), information on measures and activities related to technology transfer implemented or planned since its previous national communication or biennial report. In reporting such measures and activities, Annex II Parties shall, to the extent possible, provide information on the recipient country, the targeted area of mitigation or adaptation, the sector involved and the sources of technology transfer from the public or private sectors, and shall distinguish between activities undertaken by the public and private sectors. As the ability of Parties to collect adequate information on private-sector activities is limited, Parties may indicate, where feasible, how they have encouraged private-sector activities and how those activities help Parties to meet their commitments under Article 4, paragraphs 3, 4 and 5, of the Convention.
				
					Table 9
					Description of selected projects or programmes that promoted practicable
						steps to facilitate and/or finance the transfer of, or access to, environmentally sound technologies
							| Project/programme title: |
							| Purpose: |
							| Recipient country: | Sector: | Total funding: | Years in operation: |
							|  |  |  |  |
							| Description: |
							| Factors that led to project/programme’s success: |
							| Technology transferred: |
							| Impact on greenhouse gas emissions/removals (optional): |
							
							
							| Table 10 Provision of support for technology development and transfera, b |
							| Recipient country and/or region | Targeted area | Measures and activities related to technology transfer | Sectorc | Source of funding for technology transfer | Activities undertaken by | Status | Additional informationd |
							|  | Mitigation Adaptation Mitigation and adaptation |  | Energy Transport Industry Agriculture Water and sanitation Other | Private  Public Private and public | Private Public Private and public | Implemented Planned |  |
							|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
							
								a   To be reported to the extent possible.
								b   The table should include measures and activities implemented or planned since the previous national communication or biennial report.
								c   Parties may report sectoral disaggregation, as appropriate.
								d   Additional information may include, for example, information on funding for technology development and transfer provided, a short description of the measure or activity and information on cofinancing arrangements.
							
							
			C.	Capacity-building
				59.	Each Annex II Party shall provide information, to the extent possible, on how it has provided capacity-building support that responds to existing and emerging capacity-building needs identified by non-Annex I Parties in the areas of mitigation, adaptation and technology development and transfer. Information should be reported in textual and tabular format (see table 11 below) as a description of individual measures and activities.
				Table 11
				Provision of capacity-building supporta
				| Recipient country/region | Targeted area | Programme or project title | Description of programme or projectb, c |
				|  | Mitigation Adaptation Technology development and transfer Multiple areas |  |  |
				|  |  |  |  |
				| a   To be reported to the extent possible.  b   Each Party included in Annex II to the Convention shall provide information, to the extent possible, on how it has provided capacity-building support that responds to existing and emerging capacity-building needs identified by Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention in the areas of mitigation, adaptation and technology development and transfer. c   Additional information may be provided on, for example, the measure or activity and cofinancing arrangements. |
				
		IX.	Research and systematic observation
			60.	Pursuant to Articles 4, paragraph 1(g) and (h), 5 and 12, paragraph 1(b), of the Convention, Annex I Parties shall communicate information on their actions relating to research and systematic observation.
			61.	The national communication shall address both domestic and international activities (for example, the activities of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the World Climate Research Programme, Future Earth and the Global Climate Observing System) and also reflect action taken to support related capacity-building in developing countries.
			62.	Parties shall provide summary information on global climate observing system activities in accordance with paragraph 67 below. To guide the reporting under sections A and C below, Parties should refer to the detailed guidance provided in the revised “UNFCCC reporting guidelines on global climate observing systems” (annex to decision 11/CP.13) and any relevant decisions subsequently adopted by the COP.
			63.	The national communication should report, in summary form, on action taken. For example, the results of research studies, model runs or data analysis should not be included in this section.
			A.	General policy on and funding of research and systematic observation
				64.	Parties should provide information on their general policy on and funding of research and systematic observation.
				65.	Parties should identify opportunities for and barriers to free and open international exchange of data and information and report on action taken to overcome such barriers.
			B.	Research
				66.	Parties should provide, inter alia, information on highlights, innovations and significant efforts made with regard to:
					(a)	Climate process and climate system studies, including paleoclimatic studies;
					(b)	Modelling and prediction, including global and regional climate models;
					(c)	Research on the impacts of climate change;
					(d)	Socioeconomic analysis, including analysis of both the impacts of climate change and response options;
					(e)	Research and development of mitigation and adaptation approaches, including technologies.
			C.	Systematic observation
				67.	Parties should provide summary information on the current status of national plans, programmes and support for ground- and space-based climate observing systems, including long-term continuity of data, data quality control and availability, and exchange and archiving of data in the following areas:
					(a)	Atmospheric climate observing systems, including those measuring atmospheric constituents;
					(b)	Ocean climate observing systems;
					(c)	Terrestrial climate observing systems;
					(d)	Cryosphere climate observing systems;
					(e)	Support for developing countries to establish and maintain observing systems and related data and monitoring systems.
		X.	Education, training and public awareness
			68.	In accordance with Articles 4, paragraph 1(i), 6 and 12, paragraph 1(b), of the Convention, Annex I Parties shall communicate information on their actions relating to education, training and public awareness. In this section, Parties should report, inter alia, on public information and education materials, resource or information centres, training programmes and participation in international activities. Parties may report on the extent of public participation in the preparation or domestic review of the national communication.
			69.	The national communication may present information on such aspects as:
				(a)	General policy on education, training and public awareness;
				(b)	Primary, secondary and higher education;
				(c)	Public information campaigns;
				(d)	Training programmes;
				(e)	Resource or information centres;
				(f)	Involvement of the public and non-governmental organizations;
				(g)	Participation in international activities;
				(h)	Monitoring, review and evaluation of the implementation of Article 6 of the Convention.
		XI.	Updating of the guidelines
			70.	These guidelines shall be reviewed and revised, as appropriate, in accordance with relevant COP decisions.
		XII.	Structure of the national communication
			71.	The information identified in these guidelines shall be communicated by each Party in a single document in one of the official languages of the United Nations. Parties shall provide an electronic version of their national communication to the secretariat through the appropriate UNFCCC submission system. The length of the national communication may be decided by the submitting Party, but every effort shall be made to avoid overlong national communications, in order to facilitate the consideration process.
			72.	Where supplementary documents are provided as annexes to the national communication, the annexes are considered as part of the national communication itself. A clear reference to the relevant information in the annexes should be provided in the main text of the national communication.
			73.	Where statistical data are provided, they should be accompanied by a definition of terms, unless they are obvious.
			74.	To facilitate the transparency, comparability and consistency of national communications, Parties shall organize the content of their national communication following the outline contained in the appendix and may rephrase the subsection headings as appropriate and explain the reasons for rephrasing. To ensure completeness, no mandatory element shall be excluded. If mandatory elements cannot be reported for any reason, the Party shall explain the reason for partial reporting in the section relating to those elements.
			
	Appendix
	Structure of the national communication
		I.	Executive summary
		
		II.	National circumstances relevant to greenhouse gas
		emissions and removals
		
		III.	Greenhouse gas inventory information
		
		A. Summary tables
		B. Descriptive summary
		C. National inventory arrangements
		
		IV.	Policies and measures
		
		A.  Policymaking process
		B. 	Policies and measures and their effects
		C. 	Policies and measures no longer in place
		
		V. 	Projections and total effect of policies and measures
		
			A.	Projections
			B.	Assessment of aggregate effect of policies and measures
			C.	Methodology
		
			VI. 	Vulnerability assessment, climate change impacts and
			adaptation measures
			
			VII. 	Financial, technological and capacity-building support
			
				A.  Finance
				B.	Technology development and transfer
				C. 	Capacity-building
			
			VIII. 	Research and systematic observation
			
				A.  General policy on and funding of research and systematic observation
				B. 	Research
				C. 	Systematic observation
				
			IX. 	Education, training and public awareness
			
		Annex. Supplementary documents
			7th plenary meeting
12 December 2019
		
