|  | United Nations | FCCC/PA/CMA/2019/6/Add.1 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 16 March 2020  Original: English |

Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting
of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
Report of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement on its second session, held in Madrid from 2 to 15 December 2019
	Addendum
	Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its second session
	Contents
Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
	Decision	Page
	1/CMA.2	Chile Madrid Time for Action		2
	2/CMA.2	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated
with Climate Change Impacts and its 2019 review		4
	3/CMA.2	Initial institutional arrangements for capacity-building under the 
Paris Agreement		10
	4/CMA.2	Workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of 
response measures and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the 
Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures	 	11
	5/CMA.2	Matters relating to the Standing Committee on Finance		21
	6/CMA.2	Guidance to the Green Climate Fund		23
	7/CMA.2	Guidance to the Global Environment Facility		24
	8/CMA.2	Enhancing climate technology development and transfer to 
support implementation of the Paris Agreement		25
	9/CMA.2	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement		26
	Resolution
		1/CMA.2	Expression of gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Chile, 
the Government of the Kingdom of Spain and the people of the 
city of Madrid		27
		
	
Decision 1/CMA.2
Chile Madrid Time for Action
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
	Acknowledging that climate change is a common concern of humankind, Parties should, when taking action to address climate change, respect, promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights, the right to health, the rights of indigenous peoples, local communities, migrants, children, persons with disabilities and people in vulnerable situations and the right to development, as well as gender equality, empowerment of women and intergenerational equity,
	Recalling Article 2, paragraph 2, Article 3 and Article 4, paragraph 3, of the Paris Agreement,
	Encouraging Parties to use the opportunity in 2020 to reflect the highest possible ambition in response to the urgency of addressing climate change and with a view to achieving the long-term goals set out in Article 2 and Article 7, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement,
	Recalling decision 3/CMA.1,
	1.	Welcomes decision 1/CP.25;
	2.	Notes with concern the state of the global climate system;
	3.	Recognizes that action taken to address climate change is most effective if it is based on best available science and continually re-evaluated in the light of new findings;
	4.	Acknowledges the growing urgency of enhancing ambition and responding to the threat of climate change;
	5.	Re-emphasizes with serious concern the urgent need to address the significant gap between the aggregate effect of Parties’ mitigation efforts in terms of global annual emissions of greenhouse gases by 2020 and aggregate emission pathways consistent with holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels;
	6.	Recalls that each Party’s successive nationally determined contribution will represent a progression beyond the Party’s then current nationally determined contribution and reflect its highest possible ambition, reflecting its common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, in the light of different national circumstances;
	7.	Also recalls the request to Parties contained in decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 23–24, and urges Parties to consider the gap referred to in paragraph 5 above with a view to reflecting their highest possible ambition when responding to this request;
	8.	Reminds Parties that have not yet communicated their nationally determined contributions pursuant to Article 4, paragraph 2, and decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 22, to do so;
	9.	Reiterates its strong encouragement to Parties to provide the information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding of nationally determined contributions, described in the annex to decision 4/CMA.1;
	10.	Recalls the request contained in decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 25, to the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report, and requests the secretariat to make the report available to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-sixth session (November 2020);
	11.	Reiterates the invitation to Parties to communicate to the secretariat, by 2020, mid-century long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategies in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 19, of the Paris Agreement;
	12.	Encourages Parties to submit their first adaptation communication as soon as possible, in accordance with decision 9/CMA.1, so as to provide timely input to the first global stocktake;
	13.	Calls on Parties to engage in adaptation planning processes and the implementation of actions, including the development or enhancement of relevant plans, policies and/or contributions in accordance with Article 7, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement, with a view to continuing to make progress towards the global goal on adaptation of enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability to climate change;
	14.	Requests the Adaptation Committee to consider approaches to reviewing the overall progress made in achieving the global goal on adaptation and to reflect the outcome of this consideration in its 2021 annual report;
	15.	Underlines the importance of implementing commitments under the Paris Agreement related to finance, technology transfer and capacity-building to address the mitigation and adaptation needs and priorities of developing countries;
	16.	Urges developed country Parties to provide financial resources to assist developing country Parties with respect to both mitigation and adaptation, in continuation of their existing obligations under the Convention, and encourages other Parties to provide or continue to provide such support voluntarily;
	17.	Recalls that the provision of scaled-up financial resources should aim to achieve a balance between adaptation and mitigation, taking into account country-driven strategies, and the priorities and needs of developing country Parties, especially those that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change and have significant capacity constraints, such as the least developed countries and small island developing States, considering the need for public and grant-based resources for adaptation;
	18.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 10 above;
	19.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	8th plenary meeting
15 December 2019
	
Decision 2/CMA.2
Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts and its 2019 review
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
	Recalling decision 2/CP.19, whereby the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts was established to address loss and damage associated with the impacts of climate change, including extreme events and slow onset events, in developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change,
	Also recalling decisions 3/CP.18, 2/CP.19, 2/CP.20, 1/CP.21, 2/CP.21, 3/CP.22, 4/CP.22, 5/CP.23 and 10/CP.24,
	Further recalling Article 8 of the Paris Agreement,
	Being aware of the relevant provisions of decisions 18/CMA.1 and 19/CMA.1,
	Acknowledging that climate change is a common concern of humankind, Parties should, when taking action to address climate change, respect, promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights, the right to health, the rights of indigenous peoples, local communities, migrants, children, persons with disabilities and people in vulnerable situations and the right to development, as well as gender equality, empowerment of women and intergenerational equity,
	Reaffirming the role of the Warsaw International Mechanism in promoting the implementation of approaches to avert, minimize and address loss and damage associated with climate change impacts in a comprehensive, integrated and coherent manner,
	Also reaffirming the role of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism in guiding the implementation of the functions of the Mechanism,
	Recognizing the current insufficient level of mitigation and that reducing greenhouse gas emissions reduces the risks associated with the adverse effects of climate change,
	Also recognizing the importance of the Warsaw International Mechanism for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage in developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change,
	Recalling that the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-second session recommended that the next review of the Warsaw International Mechanism be held in 2019,
	Acknowledging the Executive Committee’s decision to identify follow-up activities to the 2019 review of the Warsaw International Mechanism under strategic workstream (e) of its five-year rolling workplan at its first meeting of 2020,
	Also acknowledging that the Executive Committee agreed to discuss its role in and contribution to the global stocktake at its future meetings, starting with its first meeting of 2020,
	Noting that the Executive Committee will evaluate progress in implementing its five-year rolling workplan in 2020 and at regular intervals at its subsequent meetings,
	Having considered the effectiveness and efficiency of the Warsaw International Mechanism, as well as barriers and gaps, challenges and opportunities, and lessons learned in relation to the Mechanism, on the basis of the terms of reference for the 2019 review of the Mechanism,
	1.	Welcomes the report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts, including the recommendations contained therein;
	2.	Also welcomes the adoption of the plans of action of the task force on displacement and the technical expert group on comprehensive risk management by the Executive Committee during its 10th meeting;
	3.	Appreciates the contribution of all organizations and experts to the work of the Executive Committee, the task force on displacement and the technical expert group on comprehensive risk management;
	4.	Acknowledges the catalytic role of the Warsaw International Mechanism in mobilizing and connecting relevant stakeholders;
	5.	Also acknowledges the progress, achievements and successful practices in implementing the Warsaw International Mechanism since 2013, while noting areas for improvement and shortcomings;
	6.	Further acknowledges that further work is needed to effectively operationalize the functions of the Warsaw International Mechanism as set out in decision 2/CP.19, paragraph 5;
	7.	Agrees that further guidance could contribute to improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the Warsaw International Mechanism, including its timeliness, relevance, visibility, coherence, complementarity, comprehensiveness, responsiveness and resourcing and the delivery and usefulness of its products and outputs;
	8.	Also agrees that the best available science, particularly in reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, should inform approaches to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with climate change impacts;
	9.	Recognizes the importance and value of indigenous, traditional and local knowledge;
	10.	Also recognizes the need to enhance the relevance, usefulness and dissemination of the outputs of the Warsaw International Mechanism to enable Parties and stakeholders to easily use and integrate these outputs into planning and implementing approaches to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage;
	11.	Encourages the Executive Committee to communicate its outputs in formats that are easy to translate, adapt and access in different contexts and by different users;
	12.	Requests the Executive Committee to identify modalities for fostering the sharing of relevant knowledge and experience among practitioners and vulnerable countries in an interactive and practical manner;
	13.	Encourages Parties to establish a loss and damage contact point through their respective national focal point;
	14.	Invites Parties to promote coherence in approaches to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage when formulating and implementing relevant national plans, strategies and frameworks, and creating enabling environments, including by considering future climate risk, reducing exposure and vulnerability, increasing resilience and coordinated action, and monitoring progress;
	15.	Recognizes the importance of particularly vulnerable developing countries and segments of the population that are already vulnerable owing to geography, socioeconomic status, livelihood, gender, age, indigenous or minority status, or disability, as well as the ecosystems they depend on, in the implementation of the Warsaw International Mechanism;
	16.	Encourages the Executive Committee to take into account when updating its five-year rolling workplan areas of work that may require short-, medium- and long-term consideration and efforts, including in relation to sustainable development and transformative change, in the context of the work of each of its thematic expert groups;
	17.	Recognizes the importance of integrating the consideration of approaches to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change into relevant work under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement;
	18.	Requests the secretariat, under the guidance of the Executive Committee, to organize meetings in conjunction with relevant regional forums, engaging relevant constituted bodies, networks and work programmes under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, within their respective mandates and workplans and in partnership with relevant organizations, to identify ways of integrating loss and damage into relevant work and guidelines, as appropriate;
	19.	Encourages relevant constituted bodies, networks and work programmes under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, within their respective mandates and workplans and in collaboration with the Executive Committee, to integrate loss and damage, where appropriate, into their work;
	20.	Acknowledges the importance of the involvement of and collaboration with relevant constituted bodies and expert groups, organizations and institutions, under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement, to enhance coordination, synergies and linkages;
	21.	Requests the Executive Committee and its thematic expert groups, in undertaking their work, to draw upon the work of and involve, as appropriate, relevant constituted bodies, networks and work programmes, as appropriate;
	22.	Encourages the Executive Committee to draw upon the work, information and expertise of bodies under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, as well as on international processes, such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030;
	23.	Invites the Executive Committee, acknowledging the need to strengthen risk assessment, to engage relevant experts and collect and disseminate information on methodologies available for integrating long-term assessment, including those associated with the quantification of risks, into comprehensive climate risk management approaches, including national and subnational assessment and planning processes;
	24.	Stresses the importance of enhancing the work on slow onset events and non-economic losses associated with climate change impacts;
	25.	Requests the Executive Committee to revise the terms of reference for and launch the expert groups on slow onset events and non-economic losses, taking into account the broad range of issues covered by the relevant strategic workstreams, which may need to be addressed using a sequential approach;
	26.	Also requests the Executive Committee and its thematic expert groups to develop technical guides within their work on their respective thematic areas, avoiding duplication of work across workstreams, which include sections on the following:
		(a)	Risk assessments, including long-term risk assessments, of climate change impacts;
		(b)	Approaches to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the risk assessments referred to in paragraph 26(a) above;
		(c)	Resources available for supporting such approaches;
		(d)	Monitoring systems for assessing the effectiveness of these approaches;
	27.	Invites relevant organizations and other stakeholders to collaborate with the Executive Committee, including through strategic partnerships, in developing and disseminating products that support national focal points, loss and damage contact points and other relevant entities in raising awareness of averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with climate change impacts;
	28.	Encourages the Executive Committee, Parties, relevant constituted bodies and organizations under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement and other relevant stakeholders to facilitate or enhance research on, and share good practices for, averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage, including long-term risk assessment and risk communication;
	29.	Requests the Executive Committee, in collaboration with relevant organizations, to foster public education and awareness-raising efforts at the regional, national and local level, including efforts with a capacity-building component;
	30.	Recognizes the importance of scaling up the mobilization of resources to support efforts to avert, minimize and address loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change;
	31.	Also recognizes the urgency of enhancing the mobilization of action and support, including finance, technology and capacity-building, for developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change;
	32.	Urges the scaling-up of action and support, as appropriate, including finance, technology and capacity-building, for developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change;
	33.	Also urges private and non-governmental organizations, funds and other stakeholders to scale up action and support, as appropriate, including finance, technology and capacity-building, for developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change;
	34.	Acknowledges the wide variety of sources, public and private, bilateral and multilateral, including alternative sources of finance, relevant to supporting approaches to avert, minimize and address loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change;
	35.	Urges the broad range of bodies, organizations and funds under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement to scale up support, including finance, technology and capacity-building, for developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change;
	36.	Invites Parties to make use of available support relevant for averting, minimizing and addressing impacts related to extreme weather events, slow onset events, non-economic losses and human mobility and for comprehensive risk management from a wide variety of sources, public and private, domestic bilateral and multilateral, under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement, including through the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, as appropriate, to the extent consistent with their mandates;
	37.	Requests the Executive Committee to further engage and strengthen its dialogue with the Standing Committee on Finance by providing input in line with decision 2/CP.19, paragraph 5(c)(ii), to the Standing Committee on Finance when, in accordance with its mandate, it provides information, recommendations and draft guidance relating to the operating entities of the financial mechanisms under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, as appropriate;
	38.	Takes note of decision 6/CMA.2, paragraph 8, whereby the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement invited the Board of the Green Climate Fund to continue providing financial resources for activities relevant to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage in developing country Parties, to the extent consistent with the existing investment, results framework and funding windows and structures of the Green Climate Fund, and to facilitate efficient access in this regard, and in this context to take into account the strategic workstreams of the five-year rolling workplan of the Executive Committee;
	39.	Requests the Executive Committee, in collaboration with the Green Climate Fund, as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism, to clarify how developing country Parties may access funding from the Green Climate Fund for the development of funding proposals related to the strategic workstreams of the five-year rolling workplan of the Executive Committee, consistently with paragraph 38 above, and to include information thereon in its annual reports;
	40.	Also requests the Executive Committee to establish, by the end of 2020, in accordance with its procedures and mandate, an expert group pursuant to decision 2/CP.19, paragraph 5(c), drawing on the work of and involving, as appropriate, existing bodies, organizations, networks and experts under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement, ensuring a fair, equitable and balanced representation within the group;
	41.	Decides that the expert group referred to in paragraph 40 above shall develop a focused plan of action, while avoiding duplication of existing efforts, at its first meeting to take place in 2020, on the following:
		(a)	The activities referred to in paragraphs 37 and 39 above;
		(b)	The collection, compilation and dissemination of information on the available sources of support under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement for activities relevant to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage in developing country Parties;
		(c)	Collaboration with the thematic expert groups of the Executive Committee to undertake the work referred to in paragraph 26 above;
		(d)	Collaboration with relevant bodies and organizations under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement pursuant to decision 2/CP.19, paragraph 5(c)(iii);
		(e)	The organization of events in conjunction with relevant meetings and conferences, including the NAP Expo and regional events, to share information and experience relating to accessing available sources of support for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, in collaboration with relevant constituted bodies and organizations under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement, as appropriate;
		(f)	The analysis and identification of enabling conditions for effective implementation of risk transfer facilities and social protection schemes in the context of comprehensive risk management, as appropriate;
	42.	Recognizes the importance of building the capacity, and enhancing the facilitation, of the provision of technical support to developing countries for approaches to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change;
	43.	Establishes, as part of the Warsaw International Mechanism, the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change to catalyse the technical assistance of relevant organizations, bodies, networks and experts for the implementation of relevant approaches at the local, national and regional level in developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change;
	44.	Invites the organizations, bodies, networks and experts referred to in paragraph 43 above engaged in providing technical assistance to developing countries to report on their progress to the Executive Committee;
	45.	Requests the Executive Committee to include relevant information from the organizations, bodies, networks and experts that have reported on their progress, as referred to in paragraph 44 above, in its annual reports;
	46.	Recommends that the next review of the Warsaw International Mechanism be held in 2024 and every five years thereafter as follows:
		(a)	The subsidiary bodies will develop terms of reference for each review at their sessions immediately before the sessions at which they will undertake a review;
		(b)	The subsidiary bodies will undertake future reviews of the Warsaw International Mechanism and forward the outputs of the reviews to the governing body or bodies;
	47.	Notes that considerations related to the governance of the Warsaw International Mechanism will continue at its third session (November 2020);
	48.	Encourages Parties to make available sufficient resources for the successful and timely implementation of the five-year rolling workplan of the Executive Committee;
	49.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in this decision;
	50.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	8th plenary meeting
15 December 2019
	
Decision 3/CMA.2
Initial institutional arrangements for capacity-building under the Paris Agreement
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
	Recalling Articles 11 and 19 of the Paris Agreement,
	Also recalling decision 3/CMA.1, paragraphs 11–13,
	Further recalling decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 81,
		1.	Recognizes the importance of capacity-building under the Paris Agreement for enhancing the capacity and ability of developing country Parties, in particular those with the least capacity and those that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change, to take effective climate action;
		2.	Also recognizes that capacity-building efforts and activities take place under a range of constituted bodies under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, in line with their respective mandates, as well as by various bodies and actors outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement;
		3.	Decides that the Paris Committee on Capacity-building shall serve the Paris Agreement in accordance with its mandate and terms of reference;
		4.	Also decides that the priority areas and activities of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building are those contained in decision 9/CP.25;
		5.	Invites the Paris Committee on Capacity-building to work closely with other constituted bodies under the Convention and the Paris Agreement to address gaps and needs, both current and emerging, in implementing capacity-building in developing countries and to enhance the coherence and coordination of capacity-building in accordance with the relevant mandates and activities of those bodies;
		6.	Requests the secretariat to include, in its annual compilation and synthesis report on the capacity-building work of bodies established under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol, information on work on issues pertaining to capacity-building under the Paris Agreement undertaken by bodies serving the Paris Agreement;
		7.	Decides that inputs to the work of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building on issues pertaining to capacity-building under the Paris Agreement may include, inter alia, submissions, information reported through the enhanced transparency framework, and, as appropriate, the compilation and synthesis report referred to in paragraph 6 above, reports on the Durban Forum and the capacity-building portal;
		8.	Confirms that the Paris Committee on Capacity-building shall report to both the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement through its annual technical progress report.
		7th plenary meeting
12 December 2019
		
Decision 4/CMA.2
Workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures
	The Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
	Recalling decisions 7/CP.24, 3/CMP.14 and 7/CMA.1,
	1.	Welcome the annual report of the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures and its progress in supporting the work of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures;
	2.	Adopt the rules of procedure of the Katowice Committee on Impacts as contained in annex I;
	3.	Adopt the workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee on Impacts as contained in annex II;
	4.	Decide that the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures, in the context of the implementation of the workplan, may consider, as needed, additional modalities for the workplan activities, consistent with the modalities identified in decision 7/CMA.1, and recommend such additional modalities for the workplan for consideration and adoption by the subsidiary bodies;
	5.	Recall paragraph 12 of decision 7/CMA.1, which provides that the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures shall provide recommendations for consideration by the subsidiary bodies with a view to the subsidiary bodies recommending actions to the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement for consideration and adoption;
	6.	Request the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures to continue considering the first annual report of the Katowice Committee on Impacts, including the recommendations and considerations contained therein, at the fifty-sixth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (June 2022) with a view to providing recommendations for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at their next sessions;
	7.	Also request the secretariat to support the implementation of the workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee on Impacts referred to in paragraph 3 above;
	8.	Take note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 3 above;
	9.	Request that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	
Annex I
	Rules of procedure of the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures
		I.	Scope
			1.	These rules of procedure shall apply to the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures (KCI) in accordance with decision 7/CMA.1 and its annex.
		II.	Mandate
			2.	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA), by decision 7/CMA.1, decided to establish the KCI to support the work of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures in implementing its work programme and operating in accordance with the terms of reference contained in the annex to that decision.
			3.	The forum and the KCI may use the following modalities, as appropriate and as decided on a case-by-case basis, to carry out the work programme of the forum:
				(a)	Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices;
				(b)	Preparing technical papers, case studies, specific examples and guidelines;
				(c)	Receiving inputs from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations;
				(d)	Organizing workshops.
		III.	Members
			4.	The CMA, by decision 7/CMA.1, decided that the KCI shall be composed of 14 members, of which:
				(a)	Two members from each of the five United Nations regional groups;
				(b)	One member from the least developed countries;
				(c)	One member from the small island developing States;
				(d)	Two members from relevant intergovernmental organizations.
			5.	By the same decision, the CMA also decided that members shall be nominated by their respective groups. Groups are encouraged to nominate members taking into account the goal of achieving gender balance. The Chairs of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) shall be notified of these appointments.
			6.	The CMA also decided that members shall serve in their expert capacity and should have relevant qualifications and expertise in the technical and socioeconomic fields related to the areas of the work programme of the forum.
			7.	Further, the CMA decided that members shall serve a term of two years and be eligible to serve a maximum of two consecutive terms in office.
			8.	The term of office of a member shall commence at the first meeting of the KCI in the calendar year of their appointment and end immediately before the first meeting of the KCI in the calendar year after their second calendar year in office.
			9.	If a member of the KCI resigns or is otherwise unable to complete the assigned term of office or to perform the functions of that office, the KCI shall request the group that nominated the member to nominate another member for the remainder of the unexpired term, in which case the appointment shall count as one term. In such a case, the KCI shall notify the Chairs of the SBSTA and the SBI.
			10.	If a member is unable to participate in two consecutive meetings of the KCI or unable to perform the functions and tasks set by the KCI, the Co-Chairs of the KCI will bring this matter to the attention of the KCI and seek clarification from the group that nominated that member on the status of their membership.
		IV.	Co-Chairs
			11.	The CMA decided that the KCI shall elect, on a consensus basis, two members from among its members to serve as Co-Chairs for a term of two years each, taking into account the need to ensure equitable geographical representation.
			12.	The CMA also decided that if one of the Co-Chairs is temporarily unable to fulfil the obligations of the office, another member designated by the KCI shall serve as Co-Chair.
			13.	If one of the Co-Chairs is unable to complete the term of office, the KCI shall elect a replacement from among its members of the relevant group of the incumbent Co-Chair, if available, to complete that term of office.
			14.	The Co-Chairs shall collaborate in chairing meetings of the KCI and in facilitating the work of the KCI throughout the year, in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI, to ensure coherence between meetings.
			15.	Following the completion of the Co-Chairs’ two-year term of office, the KCI shall nominate two members as Co-Chairs to serve the next two-year term of office.
			16.	The Co-Chairs shall declare the opening and closing of meetings of the KCI, ensure the observance of these rules of procedure and rule on points of order.
			17.	The Co-Chairs shall call upon speakers at meetings of the KCI in the order in which they signify their desire to speak. The secretariat shall maintain a list of speakers. The Co-Chairs may call a speaker to order if their remarks are not relevant to the subject under discussion.
			18.	The KCI may further define additional roles and responsibilities for the Co-Chairs.
			19.	In exercising their functions, the Co-Chairs shall remain under the authority of the KCI.
		V.	Secretariat
			20.	The secretariat shall support and facilitate the work of the KCI, by:
				(a)	Making the necessary arrangements for the meetings of the KCI, including announcing meetings, issuing invitations, making the necessary travel arrangements for members eligible for funding for their participation in meetings and making available relevant documents for meetings;
				(b)	Maintaining meeting records and arranging for the storage and preservation of documents of meetings of the KCI;
				(c)	Making documents of meetings of the KCI available to the public, unless otherwise decided by the KCI.
			21.	The secretariat shall assist the KCI in tracking its actions, in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI, in its annual report.
			22.	In addition, the secretariat shall perform any other functions assigned by the KCI, in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI.
		VI.	Meetings
			23.	The KCI shall meet twice per year, for two days per meeting, in conjunction with the sessions of the subsidiary bodies.
			24.	At least nine members of the KCI must be present to constitute a quorum.
			25.	Members are requested to confirm their attendance at meetings of the KCI as early as possible, and at least four weeks prior to a meeting for members eligible for funding for their participation, to enable sufficient time for the secretariat to make the necessary travel arrangements.
			26.	Should technical and financial resources permit, open meetings of the KCI shall be webcast through the UNFCCC website.
			27.	At each of its meetings, the KCI shall propose the dates of its next meeting. The Co-Chairs will agree the dates of the next meeting in consultation with the secretariat.
		VII.	Agenda and documentation for meetings
			28.	The Co-Chairs, assisted by the secretariat, shall prepare the provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda for each meeting of the KCI in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI. The Co-Chairs will prepare a report on the meeting, to be agreed by members, and this will be made available on the UNFCCC website. The Co-Chairs will report back to the forum on the meeting of the KCI.
			29.	The provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda for each meeting shall be transmitted to the members of the KCI at least four weeks in advance of the meeting.
			30.	Members may propose additions or changes to the provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda, in writing, to the secretariat within one week of receiving the documents, and these additions or changes shall be considered for a revised provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda by the secretariat in agreement with the Co-Chairs.
			31.	The secretariat shall transmit the provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda and any supporting documentation to the members at least two weeks prior to a meeting. Documents may be transmitted after that date with the approval of the Co-Chairs.
			32.	Documents for a meeting shall be published on the UNFCCC website at least two weeks prior to that meeting, to the extent possible.
			33.	The KCI shall, at the beginning of each meeting, adopt the agenda for that meeting.
			34.	The CMA decided that members of the KCI shall prepare an annual report for consideration by the forum with a view to making recommendations for consideration by the SBSTA and the SBI, which, in turn, are to recommend actions to the Conference of the Parties (COP), the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) and the CMA for their consideration and adoption.
			35.	This annual report shall be made available on the UNFCCC website before the relevant sessions of the COP, the CMP and the CMA.
		VIII.	Decision-making
			36.	The CMA decided that the KCI shall operate on the basis of consensus of its members.
			37.	The KCI may use electronic means to facilitate its work, as appropriate and in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI.
		IX.	Working language
			38.	The working language of the KCI shall be English.
		X.	Participation of expert advisers in meetings
			39.	The KCI, in performing its mandate, should draw upon outside expertise at its meetings.
			40.	The Co-Chairs may, in consultation with the KCI, invite representatives of international organizations, the private sector, academia and/or civil society to participate in a meeting of the KCI as expert advisers on specific issues under consideration at the meeting.
		XI.	Participation of observers
			41.	The CMA decided that meetings of the KCI shall be open to attendance as observers by all Parties and accredited observer organizations, unless otherwise decided by the KCI.
			42.	The KCI may decide to close a meeting or part thereof to observers at any time.
			43.	The secretariat shall make the dates and venues of the meetings available to the public to enable participation by observers.
			44.	Observers may, with the agreement of the KCI, be invited to address the KCI on matters under consideration by the KCI. The Co-Chairs shall notify the KCI one week in advance of the meeting of any proposed interventions by observers.
			45.	The KCI may request interventions from observers throughout the meeting, as appropriate.
		XII.	Use of electronic means of communication
			46.	The KCI shall use electronic means of communication to facilitate intersessional work, as appropriate and in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI. The secretariat shall ensure that a secure and dedicated web interface is established and maintained to facilitate the work of the KCI.
		XIII.	Working groups
			47.	The KCI may establish working groups among its members to support the forum in performing its functions. The working groups may receive inputs from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI and in line with paragraphs 39–40 above.
		XIV.	Workplan
			48.	The KCI will support the work of the forum in line with the workplan of the forum and its KCI.
		XV.	Amendments to the rules of procedure
			49.	The KCI may recommend amendments to these rules of procedure for consideration by the forum and approval by the subsidiary bodies.
			50.	Proposals and amendments to proposals for the rules of procedure may be introduced and submitted to the secretariat in writing by KCI members; such proposals and amendments shall be circulated for consideration by all members of the KCI.
			51.	No proposal for the rules of procedure shall be discussed or put forward for a decision at any meeting unless copies have been circulated to the KCI members no later than two weeks before the meeting.
		XVI.	Overriding authority of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement
			52.	In the event of a conflict between any provision of these rules and any provision of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol or the Paris Agreement, the provision of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol or the Paris Agreement shall take precedence.
	
	Annex II
	Workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures
		The Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement recall:
		(a)	Decision 7/CMA.1, paragraph 12, in which it was decided that the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures shall provide recommendations for consideration by the subsidiary bodies with a view to the subsidiary bodies recommending actions to the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement for consideration and adoption;
		(b)	Decision 7/CMA.1, annex, paragraph 4(j), in which it was decided that the members of the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures (KCI) shall prepare an annual report for consideration by the forum with a view to making recommendations to the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
		(c)	Decision 7/CMA.1, annex, paragraph 5, in which it was decided that the forum and its KCI may use the following modalities, as appropriate and as decided on a case-by-case basis, in order to carry out the work programme of the forum:
			(i)	Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices;
			(ii)	Preparing technical papers, case studies, concrete examples and guidelines;
			(iii)	Receiving input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations;
			(iv)	Organizing workshops;
		(d)	Decision 7/CMA.1, paragraph 10, in which the subsidiary bodies were requested to conduct a midterm review of the workplan of the forum;
		(e)	Decision 7/CMA.1, paragraph 9, in which it was decided that the forum shall develop and recommend a six-year workplan in line with the forum’s functions, work programme and modalities taking into account relevant policy issues of concern to Parties.
		
		Workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures (for the fifty-second to sixty-third sessions of the subsidiary bodies)
			| Activity number a | Activity | Estimated timeline for implementation | Responsible actor | Modalities/outputs |
			| a | Provide capacity-building to the Chairs and members of UNFCCC constituted bodies and technical teams of the secretariat on how to integrate gender considerations into their respective areas of work and on meeting the goal of gender balance (decision 3/CP.23) | SB 52 (June 2020) | KCI | Workshop |
			| b | Consideration of the KCI annual report by the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures (decision 7/CMA.1, annex, para. 4(j)) | SB 53 (November 2020), SB 55 (November 2021), SB 57 (November 2022), SB 59 (November 2023), SB 61 (November 2024) and SB 63 (2025) | KCI | Prepare annual report |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Consider annual report |
			| c | Midterm review of this workplan, starting from SB 56 (June 2022) (decision 7/CMA.1, para. 10) | SB 56 | Forum | Conclusions/draft decisions |
			| d | Prepare information for the technical assessment component of the global stocktake related to the impacts of the implementation of response measures (decision 19/CMA.1, paras. 8 and 24) | SB 56 and SB 57 | Forum | Forward an outcome document for consideration in the technical assessment of the global stocktake |
			| e | Review of the functions, work programme and modalities of the forum at SB 59 (decision 7/CMA.1, para. 6) | SB 58 (June 2023) and SB 59 | Forum | Prepare guiding questions for the review Receive and consider the review |
			| 1 | Explore approaches to informing the development and implementation of climate change mitigation strategies, plans, policies and programmes, including nationally determined contributions and/or long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategies, that maximize the positive and minimize the negative impactsb of response measures | SB 52 | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Awareness-building and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices |
			| 2 | Identify country-driven strategies and best practices on just transition of the workforce and creation of decent work and quality jobs and on economic diversification and transformation focusing on challenges and opportunities from the implementation of low greenhouse gas emission policies and strategies towards the achievement of sustainable development | SB 54 (May–June 2021) and SB 58 | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Concrete examples |
			|  |  | SB 58 | Forum | Awareness-building and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices In-session workshop |
			| 3 | Facilitate the development, enhancement, customization and use of tools and methodologies for modelling and assessing the impacts of the implementation of response measures, including identifying and reviewing existing tools and approaches in data-poor environments, in consultation with technical experts, practitioners and other relevant stakeholders | SB 53 and onward, as decided by the forum/KCI | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Technical paper |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Awareness-building and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices Organizing a regional workshop |
			| 4 | Enhance the capacity and understanding of Parties, through collaboration and input from stakeholders, on the assessment and analysis of the impacts of the implementation of response measures to facilitate the undertaking of economic diversification and transformation and just transition | SB 52 and SB 63 | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Technical paper |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Awareness-building and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices |
			| 5 | Build awareness and understanding of Parties and other stakeholders to assess the economic impacts of potential new industries and businesses resulting from the implementation of response measures with a view to maximizing the positive and minimizing the negative impacts of the implementation of response measures | SB 57 | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Technical paper |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Awareness-building and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices |
			| 6 | Promote the availability and use of guidelines and policy frameworks to assist Parties in promoting just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs within and across sectors, including training, retooling, retraining and reskilling systems and stakeholder engagement strategies | SB 60 (June 2024) | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Exchange and sharing of experience and best practices |
			| 7 | Facilitate the development and exchange of regional, country- and/or sector-specific case studies and approaches on (1) economic diversification and transformation and just transition of the workforce and creation of decent work and quality jobs, and (2) assessment and analysis of the impacts of the implementation of response measures with a view to understanding the positive and negative impacts | SB 59 and onward, as decided by the forum/KCI | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations KCI to examine existing case studies and identify an area where it may develop a case study, as appropriate |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Exchange and sharing of experience and best practices |
			| 8 | Identify and exchange experiences and best practices in engaging the private sector, including small and medium-sized enterprises and public–private partnerships, to facilitate the creation of decent work and quality jobs in low greenhouse gas emission sectors | SB 59 | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Technical paper |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Exchange and sharing of experience and best practices Concrete examples |
			| 9 | Identify and assess the impacts of the implementation of response measures taking into account intergenerational equity, gender considerations and the needs of local communities, indigenous peoples, youth and other people in vulnerable situations | SB 56 and SB 62 (2025) | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations Technical paper |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Exchange and sharing of experience and best practices Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations In-session workshop |
			| 10 | Share experience and best practices in reporting and informing on efforts to assess and analyse the impacts of the implementation of response measures | SB 61 | KCI | Exchange and sharing of experience and best practices |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Exchange and sharing of experience and best practices Concrete examples |
			| 11 | Facilitate, exchange and share experiences and best practices in the assessment of the environmental, social and economic co-benefits of climate change policies and actions informed by the best available science, including the use of existing tools and methodologies | SB 55 and SB 57 | KCI | Input from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations |
			|  |  |  | Forum | Exchange and sharing of experience and best practices |
			
				a   Letters represent activities from previous decisions while numbers are new activities from this decision.
				b   “Impacts” in this document refers to social, economic and environmental impacts.
				Abbreviations: KCI = Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures, SB = sessions of the subsidiary bodies.
				8th plenary meeting
15 December 2019
			
	Decision 5/CMA.2
	Matters relating to the Standing Committee on Finance
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling Article 9 of the Paris Agreement,
		Also recalling decisions 1/CP.21, paragraphs 53 and 63, 14/CMA.1 and 11/CP.25,
		1.	Takes note of the report of the Standing Committee on Finance to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its second session and the recommendations contained therein;
		2.	Endorses the workplan of the Standing Committee on Finance for 2020 and underlines the importance of the Standing Committee on Finance focusing its work in 2020 in accordance with its current mandates;
		3.	Notes the outcomes of the discussions of the Standing Committee on Finance on the 2020 Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows and the report on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement as well as the respective workplans, outreach activities and indicative timelines for preparation;
		4.	Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of Australia, Belgium, Germany, Norway, the Philippines and Switzerland for their financial contributions to support the work of the Standing Committee on Finance;
		5.	Welcomes the 2019 Forum of the Standing Committee on Finance, on the topic of climate finance and sustainable cities, with a focus on enhancing understanding of how to accelerate the mobilization and delivery of climate finance for the development of sustainable cities, and takes note of the summary report on the Forum;
		6.	Expresses its gratitude to the Governments of Australia, Lebanon and Norway, as well as to the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, the Union for the Mediterranean, and the Islamic Development Bank, for their financial, administrative and substantive support, which contributed to the success of the 2019 Forum of the Standing Committee on Finance;
		7.	Welcomes the decision of the Standing Committee on Finance on the topic of its 2020 Forum, which will be financing nature-based solutions;
		8.	Notes the inputs of the Standing Committee on Finance to the technical paper on the elaboration of the sources of and modalities for accessing financial support for addressing loss and damage;
		9.	Encourages the Standing Committee on Finance to present, to the extent possible, disaggregated information in relation to, inter alia, mapping data availability and gaps by sector, assessing climate finance flows and presenting information on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement;
		10.	Underscores the important contribution of the Standing Committee on Finance in relation to the operational definitions of climate finance, and invites Parties to submit via the submission portal, by 30 April 2020, their views on the operational definitions of climate finance for consideration by the Standing Committee on Finance in order to enhance its technical work on this matter in the context of preparing its 2020 Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows;
		11.	Takes note of the strategic outreach plan of the Standing Committee on Finance on enhancing stakeholder engagement;
		12.	Encourages the Standing Committee on Finance, in implementing its strategic outreach plan, to build on existing efforts to reach out to developing country Parties and relevant developing country stakeholders when generating data and information for the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement;
		13.	Looks forward to the inputs that may be provided by the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts to the work of the Standing Committee on Finance for its consideration in preparing elements of draft guidance for the operating entities;
		14.	Encourages the Standing Committee on Finance to continue to enhance its efforts towards ensuring gender-responsiveness in implementing its workplan;
		15.	Emphasizes the importance of the transparency of the proceedings and decision-making processes of the Standing Committee on Finance;
		16.	Takes note of the appointment of Standing Committee on Finance focal points to liaise with the other constituted bodies under the Convention and the Paris Agreement;
		17.	Decides to initiate the review of the functions of the Standing Committee on Finance relating to the Paris Agreement, as part of the review referred to in decision 11/CP.25 with a view to concluding it at its fifth session (November 2022);
		18.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to report to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its third session (November 2020) on progress in implementing its workplan;
		19.	Also requests that the actions of the Standing Committee on Finance called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		8th plenary meeting
15 December 2019
		
	Decision 6/CMA.2
	Guidance to the Green Climate Fund
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		1.	Recommends that the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-fifth session transmit to the Green Climate Fund the guidance contained in paragraphs 2–8 below, in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 61;
		2.	Welcomes the report of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-fifth session and its addendum, including the list of actions taken by the Board of the Green Climate Fund (hereinafter referred to as the Board) in response to guidance received from the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
		3.	Also welcomes the Board’s decision confirming that the current Green Climate Fund modalities enable support for the preparation and implementation of nationally determined contributions and adaptation-related elements of the Paris Agreement;
		4.	Recalls Article 7, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement, in which Parties established a global goal on adaptation for enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability to climate change;
		5.	Takes note of the encouragement of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement for the Green Climate Fund, among others, to continue channelling support to developing country Parties for the implementation of their adaptation plans and actions in accordance with the priorities and needs outlined in their adaptation communication and/or nationally determined contributions;
		6.	Encourages the Green Climate Fund to continue to enhance its support for adaptation and requests the Green Climate Fund to:
			(a)	Swiftly conclude its work on guidance on the approach and scope for providing support to adaptation activities;
			(b)	Continue to enhance its support for the implementation of national adaptation plans, in line with Board decisions on enhancing readiness programming;
		7.	Also encourages the Green Climate Fund to continue to collaborate with the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the Technology Executive Committee with a view to both strengthening cooperative action on technology development and transfer at different stages of the technology cycle and achieving a balance between support for mitigation and support for adaptation;
		8.	Invites the Board of the Green Climate Fund to continue providing financial resources for activities relevant to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage in developing country Parties, to the extent consistent with the existing investment, results framework and funding windows and structures of the Green Climate Fund, and to facilitate efficient access in this regard, and in this context to take into account the strategic workstreams of the five-year rolling workplan of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.
		8th plenary meeting
15 December 2019
	Decision 7/CMA.2
	Guidance to the Global Environment Facility
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		1.	Recommends that the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-fifth session transmit to the Global Environment Facility the guidance contained in paragraphs 2–3 below, in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 61;
		2.	Welcomes the report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-fifth session, including the list of actions taken by the Global Environment Facility in response to the guidance received from the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
		3.	Requests the Global Environment Facility, as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism, to adequately support developing country Parties in preparing their first and subsequent biennial transparency reports under its seventh replenishment and throughout its replenishment cycles in accordance with Article 13, paragraphs 14–15, of the Paris Agreement and decision 18/CMA.1.
		8th plenary meeting
15 December 2019
	Decision 8/CMA.2
	Enhancing climate technology development and transfer to support implementation of the Paris Agreement
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling Article 10 of the Paris Agreement,
		Also recalling decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 66 and 68, and decision 15/CMA.1,
		1.	Welcomes the joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network for 2019 and the efforts of the bodies in incorporating the guidance contained in the technology framework into their respective workplan and programme of work;
		2.	Notes, recalling decision 15/CMA.1, paragraph 3, that the information on how the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network have incorporated the guidance contained in the technology framework into their respective workplan and programme of work was not included in a comprehensive manner in the joint annual report referred to in paragraph 1 above, and requests the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network to include this information in their joint annual report for 2020;
		3.	Also notes the areas identified by the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network for collaboration in 2019–2022, in supporting implementation of the Paris Agreement, and requests them to finalize in 2020 the development of activities to be undertaken jointly in those areas with a view to incorporating the guidance contained in the technology framework into these activities;
		4.	Encourages the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network to continue to report on the progress of their work as well as on challenges and lessons learned in implementing the technology framework;
		5.	Requests the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network to continue to implement their respective mandates with strengthened efforts on all key themes of the technology framework when serving the Paris Agreement.
		7th plenary meeting
12 December 2019
		
	Decision 9/CMA.2
	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling Article 6, paragraphs 2, 4 and 8, of the Paris Agreement,
		Also recalling decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 36–40, and decision 8/CMA.1,
		Having considered the outcomes of the work of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement in response to the request of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		1.	Notes the draft decision texts on matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement prepared by the President of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its second session, while recognizing that these draft texts do not represent a consensus among Parties;
		2.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice to continue consideration of the matters referred to in paragraph 1 above at its fifty-second session (June 2020) on the basis of the draft decision texts referred to in paragraph 1 above, with a view to recommending draft decisions for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its third session (November 2020).
		8th plenary meeting
15 December 2019
		
	Resolution 1/CMA.2
	Expression of gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Chile, the Government of the Kingdom of Spain and the people of the city of Madrid
		Resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
			The Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
			Having met in Madrid from 2 to 15 December 2019,
			1.	Express their profound gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Chile and the Government of the Kingdom of Spain for having made it possible for the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the Parties, the fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the second session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to be held in Madrid;
			2.	Request the Government of the Kingdom of Spain and the Government of the Republic of Chile to convey to the city and people of Madrid the gratitude of the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement for the hospitality and warmth extended to the participants.
			10th plenary meeting
15 December 2019
			
