|  | United Nations | FCCC/PA/CMA/2024/17/Add.2 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 27 March 2025  Original: English |

Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting 
of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
Report of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement on its 
sixth session, held in Baku from 11 to 24 November 2024
	Addendum
	Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its sixth session
	Contents
Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties
	Decision	Page
		8/CMA.6	Matters relating to the Standing Committee on Finance		2
		9/CMA.6	Guidance to the Green Climate Fund		3
		10/CMA.6	Guidance to the Global Environment Facility		4
		11/CMA.6	Report of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage and guidance to the Fund		5
		12/CMA.6	Arrangements between the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties 
serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board of the 
Fund for responding to Loss and Damage		8
		13/CMA.6	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund		14
		14/CMA.6	Sharm el-Sheikh dialogue on the scope of Article 2, paragraph 1(c), of the 
Paris Agreement and its complementarity with Article 9 of the Paris Agreement		17
		15/CMA.6	Report of developed country Parties on doubling the collective provision of climate 
finance for adaptation to developing country Parties from 2019 levels by 2025		18
	
Decision 8/CMA.6
Matters relating to the Standing Committee on Finance
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
	Recalling Article 2, paragraph 1(c), and Article 9 of the Paris Agreement,
	Also recalling decisions 1/CP.21, paragraphs 53 and 63, 11/CP.25, 5/CP.26, 14/CMA.1, 5/CMA.2, 11/CMA.3, 14/CMA.4 and 9/CMA.5,
	Further recalling decision 1/CMA.4, paragraph 42,
	1.	Affirms decision 2/CP.29;
	2.	Notes the mapping of available information relevant to Article 2, paragraph 1(c), of the Paris Agreement, including its reference to Article 9 thereof, in the sixth Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows;
	3.	Recognizes the importance of making finance flows consistent with a pathway towards low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient development and that there is no common interpretation of the scope of Article 2, paragraph 1(c), of the Paris Agreement or the manner of its implementation and encourages Parties to continue constructive engagement on this issue, where relevant, including under the strengthened Sharm el-Sheikh dialogue on the scope of Article 2, paragraph 1(c), of the Paris Agreement and its complementarity with Article 9 of the Paris Agreement;
	4.	Recalls the request for the Standing Committee on Finance to include in its sixth Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows information reported in biennial communications under Article 9, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement, as appropriate;
	5.	Also recalls the request for the Standing Committee on Finance to consider Article 4, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement in implementing its relevant mandates and workplan;
	6.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to report to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its seventh session (November 2025) on progress in implementing its workplan for 2025;
	7.	Also requests the Standing Committee on Finance to consider the guidance provided to it in other relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement.
	11th plenary meeting
	23 November 2024
I.	
Decision 9/CMA.6
Guidance to the Green Climate Fund
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
	1.	Recommends that the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-ninth session transmit to the Green Climate Fund the guidance contained in paragraphs 2–8 below;
	2.	Welcomes the report of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-ninth session, including the information on action taken by the Board of the Green Climate Fund in response to guidance received from the Conference of the Parties;
	3.	Also welcomes the adoption by the Board of a policy for results-based payments for activities referred to in paragraph 70 of decision 1/CP.16;
	4.	Encourages the Board to support the increased use of alternative financial instruments and structures with a view to increasing public and private finance, in line with the Board’s risk appetite statement, for mitigation and adaptation projects in developing countries in line with the Board’s policy;
	5.	Requests the Board to continue to streamline and simplify access to funding by reducing median times taken during the second replenishment of the Green Climate Fund to process accreditation, readiness, and standard proposal approval process and simplified approval process proposals from review to first disbursement, relative to the first replenishment, with an emphasis on reducing processing time for funding proposals in line with the Strategic Plan for the Green Climate Fund 2024–2027 and strengthening relationships with developing countries, especially those that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change and have significant capacity constraints, particularly the least developed countries and small island developing States;
	6.	Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Green Climate Fund, in collaboration with the Global Environment Facility, the Adaptation Fund and the Climate Investment Funds, to enhance access to climate finance with a view to scaling up successful projects, maximizing impact and strengthening coherence and invites the Board to ensure that efforts to enhance coherence and complementarity do not restrict the access of developing countries to resources or reduce the finance available to them;
	7.	Notes paragraphs 18–19 of decision 3/CP.29 regarding guidance to the Green Climate Fund;
	8.	Confirms that guidance may be provided, for transmission by the Conference of the Parties, in accordance with the modified arrangements outlined in the annex to decision 3/CP.29, upon request by a Party consistent with rules 9–13 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, as well as at each session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement preceding the final year of each replenishment of the Green Climate Fund.
	11th plenary meeting
	23 November 2024

Decision 10/CMA.6
Guidance to the Global Environment Facility
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
	1.	Recommends that the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-ninth session transmit to the Global Environment Facility the guidance contained in paragraphs 2–6 below;
		2.	Requests the Global Environment Facility to include further information in its annual report for 2025 regarding how funds are used to ensure that enabling activities support the sustainability of national reporting systems and enhance institutional capacity in developing country Parties;
		3.	Also requests the Global Environment Facility to consider how it can improve the delivery of support for the Capacity-building Initiative for Transparency and enabling activities to avoid gaps between the project cycles, provide support that is timely, and enhance the sustainability of national reporting systems and workflows necessary for developing country Parties to meet their requirements under the enhanced transparency framework under the Paris Agreement on a continuous basis;
		4.	Encourages the Global Environment Facility, in the context of its ninth replenishment, to consider:
			(a)	Information submitted by developing country Parties in their first biennial transparency reports pursuant to paragraphs 143–145 of the annex to decision 18/CMA.1;
			(b)	Information submitted by Parties pursuant to paragraph 17 of decision 18/CMA.5;
			(c)	The synthesis report referred to in paragraph 18 of decision 18/CMA.5;
			(d)	The use of transparency support funds available through the transparency allocation under its eighth replenishment;
		5.	Notes paragraphs 16–17 of decision 4/CP.29 regarding guidance to the Global Environment Facility;
		6.	Confirms that guidance may be provided, for transmission by the Conference of the Parties, in accordance with the modification to the memorandum of understanding as outlined in the annex to decision 4/CP.29, upon request by a Party consistent with rules 9–13 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, as well as at each session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement preceding the final year of each replenishment of the Global Environment Facility.
		11th plenary meeting
		23 November 2024
I.	
Decision 11/CMA.6
Report of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage and guidance to the Fund
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
	Recalling decisions 2/CP.27 and 2/CMA.4; and 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5,
	1.	Welcomes the report of the Board of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage for 2024 and the information therein;
	2.	Notes the following information and actions of the Board presented in the report:
		(a)	The selection by the Board of the Philippines as the host country of the Board through an open, transparent and competitive process, and the conclusion of the host country agreement between the Philippines and the Board;
		(b)	The approval by the Board of the draft of the arrangements, as developed by the Standing Committee on Finance, to be concluded between the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board consistently with the Governing Instrument of the Fund;
		(c)	The prompt selection of the Executive Director of the Fund by the Board through a merit-based, open and transparent process;
		(d)	The confirmation by the Board that the conditions set out in paragraph 20 of decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5 can be met during an interim period of four years;
		(e)	The decision of the Board to launch an independent assessment of the performance of the World Bank as host of the Fund’s secretariat no later than at the first meeting of the Board in 2027 and to report on the outcomes thereof to the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement no later than at their thirty-third (November 2028) and tenth (November 2028) sessions respectively;
	3.	Welcomes the rapid progress of the Board in operationalizing the Fund;
	4.	Notes with appreciation the confirmation by the World Bank of its ability and willingness to operationalize the Fund as a World Bank hosted financial intermediary fund for the interim period referred to in paragraph ‎2(d) above, as well as that the World Bank took the steps necessary to promptly operationalize the Fund as a financial intermediary fund; submitted to the Board of the Fund within eight months after the conclusion of the twenty‑eighth session of the Conference of the Parties the relevant financial intermediary fund documentation, approved by the World Bank Board of Directors, including a hosting agreement between the Board of the Fund and the World Bank, based on consultations with and guidance from the Board of the Fund; and established a new, dedicated and independent secretariat hosted by the World Bank to service the Fund;
	5.	Welcomes the confirmation by the Board of the Fund that the conditions set out in paragraph 20 of decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5 can be met by the World Bank during the interim period referred to in paragraph ‎2(d) above, and the signing of the agreements between the Board of the Fund and the World Bank to operationalize the Fund as a World Bank hosted financial intermediary fund;
	6.	Welcomes with appreciation that the Government of the Philippines promptly conferred the Board of the Fund with the legal personality and the legal capacity as necessary for discharging its roles and functions, in particular the legal capacity to negotiate, conclude and enter into a hosting arrangement with the World Bank as interim trustee and host of the Fund’s secretariat;
	7.	Expresses appreciation to the Governments of Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, the Bahamas, Barbados, Eswatini, Kenya and Togo for offering to host the Board of the Fund and to confer it with the necessary legal personality and legal capacity;
	8.	Also expresses appreciation to the secretariats of the UNFCCC and the Green Climate Fund and the United Nations Development Programme for jointly forming the interim secretariat for the Fund and providing support, including administrative support, to the Board of the Fund during the transitional period until the establishment of the independent secretariat and looks forward to a smooth and cost-effective transition of the interim secretariat’s functions under the new, dedicated and independent secretariat;
	9.	Welcomes the financial pledges made to the Fund by the Governments of Australia, Austria, Estonia, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea, New Zealand and Sweden and the government of the Walloon Region of Belgium, which, together with the other pledges mentioned in table 2 of the annex to document FCCC/CP/2024/9–FCCC/PA/CMA/2024/13, amount to the equivalent of USD 731.15 million;
	10.	Notes the importance of converting pledges to contributions in a timely manner, urges the conversion of pledges as soon as possible, and requests the Board to engage with the relevant Parties for the timely conversion of pledges to fully executed contribution agreements or arrangements to increase the predictability of resources for the Fund;
	11.	Expresses gratitude to the Government of Japan for disbursing USD 10 million towards the operationalization of the Fund;
	12.	Expresses appreciation to the Governments of the United Arab Emirates, the Republic of Korea and Azerbaijan for hosting the 1st, 2nd and 3rd meetings respectively of the Board of the Fund;
	13.	Welcomes the prompt selection and appointment of Ibrahima Cheikh Diong as the Executive Director of the Fund through a merit-based, open and transparent process;
	14.	Also welcomes the launch of the annual high-level dialogue on coordination and complementarity at a high-level event, organized by the Presidency of the twenty-ninth session of the Conference of the Parties and the Board of the Fund, held on the margins of the World Leaders Climate Action Summit in conjunction with the twenty-ninth session of the Conference of the Parties and the sixth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
	15.	Further welcomes the adoption by the Board of the Fund of its workplan for 2024–‍2025, which is aimed at implementing the provisions of the Governing Instrument of the Fund with a view to approving funding decisions as soon as possible, developing operational procedures and policies for delivering on the mandate of the Fund, and ensuring appropriate safeguards, and looks forward to the timely implementation of the workplan;
	16.	Notes with appreciation the Board’s timeline in its workplan for preparing a long‑term fundraising and resource mobilization strategy and plan for the Fund by the end of 2025, guided by paragraph 12 of decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5 and paragraphs 54–56 of the Governing Instrument of the Fund;
	17.	Affirms the need to promote efforts that enhance coherence and complementarity of the Fund with new and existing arrangements for responding to loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change and welcomes the inclusion of a target in the workplan of the Board to develop a complementarity and coherence framework in 2025;
	18.	Invites Parties to submit views and recommendations on elements of guidance for the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage via the submission portal no later than 10 weeks prior to the seventh session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (November 2025);
	19.	Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to take into consideration the submissions referred to in paragraph 18 above when preparing its draft guidance for the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage for consideration by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its seventh session;
	20.	Also requests the Board of the Fund to include in its annual report to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement information on the steps it has taken to implement the guidance provided in this decision.
	11th plenary meeting
	23 November 2024

I.	
Decision 12/CMA.6
Arrangements between the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
	Recalling Article 11 of the Convention and Article 9, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement,
	Also recalling paragraphs 2–3 of decisions 2/CP.27 and 2/CMA.4; and decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, as well as annex I to those decisions, which sets out the Governing Instrument of the Fund referred to in paragraph 3 of decisions 2/CP.27 and 2/CMA.4,
	Further recalling decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, in which, inter alia, the Fund was designated as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism of the Convention, also serving the Paris Agreement, and the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement were requested to conclude arrangements with the Board of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage to ensure that it is accountable to and functions under the guidance of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
	Recognizing that, pursuant to paragraph 6 of decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, the arrangements between the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board are to be consistent with decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, and the Governing Instrument of the Fund contained in annex I to those decisions,
	Recalling decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, in which the Standing Committee on Finance was requested to develop the arrangements to be concluded between the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board, consistently with the Governing Instrument of the Fund, for consideration and approval by the Board and subsequent consideration and approval by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-ninth session and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its sixth session,
	Also recalling paragraph 13 of the Governing Instrument of the Fund,
	1.	Welcomes with appreciation the draft arrangements between the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage as contained in the report of the Standing Committee on Finance and approved by the Board;
	2.	Confirms that the arrangements between the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board shall be consistent with the Governing Instrument of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage, contained in annex I to decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5;
	3.	Notes that the Board has approved the arrangements, as transmitted by the Standing Committee on Finance, contained in annex IV to the report of the Board;
	4.	Approves the arrangements between the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board contained in the annex, thereby bringing the arrangements into force subject to the approval of the Conference of the Parties;
	5.	Requests the Board to report on the implementation of the arrangements referred to in paragraph 4 above in its annual reports to the Conference of the Parties, starting at its thirtieth session (November 2025), and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, starting at its seventh session (November 2025).

Annex
Arrangements between the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage
	Preamble
	Recalling Article 11 of the Convention and Article 9, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement,
	Also recalling paragraphs 2–3 of decisions 2/CP.27 and 2/CMA.4; and decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, as well as annex I to those decisions, which sets out the Governing Instrument of the Fund referred to in paragraph 3 of decisions 2/CP.27 and 2/CMA.4 (hereinafter referred to as the Fund),
	Recognizing that the Fund is designated as an entity entrusted with the operation of the Financial Mechanism of the Convention, also serving the Paris Agreement, which will be accountable to and function under the guidance of the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, as per paragraph 5 of decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5,
	Also recognizing that, pursuant to paragraph 6 of decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, the arrangements between the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and the Board of the Fund are to be consistent with decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5 and the Governing Instrument of the Fund,
	The Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC (COP), the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) and the Board of the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage (hereinafter referred to as the “Board” and the “Fund” respectively) hereby agree to the following arrangements:
	I.	Purpose of these arrangements
		1.	The purpose of these arrangements is to set out the working relationship between the COP, the CMA and the Board to ensure that the Fund is accountable to and functions under the guidance of the COP and the CMA, consistently with the Governing Instrument of the Fund, and receives guidance from the COP and the CMA on its policies, programme priorities and eligibility criteria.
	II.	Determination and communication of guidance from the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
		2.	The Board will receive guidance from the COP and the CMA on its policies, programme priorities and eligibility criteria.
		3.	The Board will submit annual reports to the COP and the CMA for their consideration.
		4.	The COP and the CMA will adopt decisions providing guidance to the Board at each of their sessions, unless otherwise decided by the COP and the CMA.
		5.	The COP and the CMA will provide such guidance on the basis of, inter alia, a thorough consideration of the information in the annual reports of the Board.
		6.	The Board may review the periodicity of the guidance from the COP and the CMA and make a recommendation thereon for consideration by the COP and the CMA.
	III.	Conformity with guidance of the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
		7.	The Board will take appropriate action in response to the guidance received from the COP and the CMA and will report on such action in its annual reports.
	IV.	Reconsideration of funding decisions
		8.	These arrangements reaffirm that the Board has responsibility for setting the strategic direction of the Fund and for the Fund’s governance and operational modalities, policies, frameworks and work programme, including relevant funding decisions.
		9.	The COP and the CMA may provide additional guidance to the Board to clarify policies, programme priorities and eligibility criteria as they impact funding decisions.
		10.	Further modalities by which a particular funding decision may be reconsidered, as per Article 11, paragraph 3(b), of the Convention, will be developed by the Board, as appropriate.
	V.	Financial instruments
		11.	In its provision of finance, the Fund will take into account guidance from the COP and the CMA, pursuant to paragraphs 57–59 of the Governing Instrument.
	VI.	Annual reports of the Board to the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
		12.	The Board will include in its annual reports to the COP and the CMA:
			(a)	Information on implementation of policies, programme priorities and eligibility criteria, including information on action taken by the Board in response to guidance provided by the COP and the CMA;
			(b)	A synthesis of the different activities under implementation and a list of the activities approved, as well as a financial report;
			(c)	Information on all activities financed by the Fund;
			(d)	Action taken to develop, operate and review the resource allocation system referred to in paragraphs 60–61 of the Governing Instrument;
			(e)	Any reports of the independent evaluations of the performance of the Fund referred to in paragraphs 64–65 of the Governing Instrument;
			(f)	Information on how it has drawn on expert and technical advice, including from the relevant constituted bodies established under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, as appropriate;
			(g)	Information on the high-level dialogue referred to in paragraph 11 of annex II to decisions 1/CP.28 and 5/CMA.5, as described in paragraph 12 of annex II to those decisions;
			(h)	Information on action taken to enhance coordination and complementarity pursuant to paragraphs 51–53 of the Governing Instrument, as well as recommendations to the COP and the CMA pursuant to paragraph 22(s) of the Governing Instrument.
		13.	The Board is encouraged to include information in its annual reports on how it has established consultative forums to engage and communicate with stakeholders, pursuant to paragraph 28 of the Governing Instrument, and how it has developed and managed mechanisms to promote the input and participation of stakeholders, pursuant to paragraph 29 of the Governing Instrument.
		14.	The COP and the CMA may request the Board to provide additional information in its annual reports.
	VII.	Determination of funding necessary and available
		15.	The Board will include information in its annual reports to the COP and the CMA on its long-term fundraising and resource mobilization strategy, as appropriate.
	VIII.	Periodic review of the Fund
		16.	Pursuant to paragraph 66 of the Governing Instrument, the Fund will be subject to periodic reviews conducted by the COP and the CMA, which will be informed by, inter alia, the results of the independent evaluation of the performance of the Fund referred to in paragraph 64 of the Governing Instrument and the annual reports of the Board to the COP and the CMA.
	IX.	Amendments to the Governing Instrument
		17.	The Board may recommend amendments to the Governing Instrument for consideration by the COP and the CMA.
	X.	Termination of the Fund
		18.	The Board may recommend the termination of the Fund for consideration by the COP and the CMA.
	XI.	Cooperation between the secretariat of the Fund and the UNFCCC secretariat, and representation of the Board in sessions of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
		19.	The secretariat of the Fund may, as necessary and subject to the direction of the Board of the Fund, cooperate and exchange views with the UNFCCC secretariat on matters relevant to the operation of the Financial Mechanism of the Convention and the Paris Agreement, including implementation of these arrangements between the COP, the CMA and the Board, coordination with other international financing channels and funding arrangements, as appropriate, and participation of representatives in sessions of the COP and the CMA.
		20.	The participation of representatives of the UNFCCC secretariat in meetings of the Board, and of the secretariat of the Fund in sessions of the COP and the CMA, is to be governed by the rules of procedure of the Board and the draft rules of procedure of the COP respectively.
	XII.	Final clauses
		21.	These arrangements can only be modified by mutual written consent of the COP, the CMA and the Board.
		22.	These arrangements are effective upon approval by the Board and subsequent approval by the COP and the CMA.
		23.	These arrangements may only be terminated by mutual written consent of the COP, the CMA and the Board.
		11th plenary meeting
		23 November 2024
	
	I.	
	Decision 13/CMA.6
	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling decisions 1/CMP.3, 1/CMP.4, 2/CMP.10, 1/CMP.11, 2/CMP.12, 1/CMP.13, 1/CMP.14, 3/CMP.15, 3/CMP.16, 4/CMP.17 and 3/CMP.18,
		Also recalling decisions 13/CMA.1, 1/CMA.3, paragraph 18, 13/CMA.3, 18/CMA.4 and 12/CMA.5,
		1.	Welcomes the annual report of the Adaptation Fund Board for 2024, including its addendum, and the information therein;
		2.	Notes the following information, actions and decisions relating to the Adaptation Fund Board presented in the report referred to in paragraph 1 above:
			(a)	The progress of the Adaptation Fund Board in implementing the Medium‑Term Strategy of the Adaptation Fund for 2023–‍2027 in line with the Board’s implementation plan;
			(b)	The decision of the Adaptation Fund Board to update the environmental and social safeguard policy of the Adaptation Fund;
			(c)	The adoption of a resource mobilization target for 2024 of USD 300 million, to come from a greater number of contributors than in 2023;
			(d)	Cumulative receipts of USD 1,827.14 million, as at 30 June 2024, into the Adaptation Fund Trust Fund, comprising USD 215.83 million from the monetization of certified emission reductions, USD 1,489.88 million from voluntary contributions and USD 121.43 million from investment income earned on the Trust Fund balance;
			(e)	Cash receipts amounting to USD 309.94 million, comprising USD 0.91 million from the monetization of certified emission reductions, USD 256.92 million from voluntary contributions and USD 52.11 million from investment income earned on the Adaptation Fund Trust Fund balance, received between 1 July 2023 and 30 June 2024;
			(f)	Outstanding pledged contributions from previous years of USD 122.57 million, of which USD 72.67 million under signed agreements, as at 20 November 2024;
		3.	Welcomes the financial pledges made towards the Adaptation Fund resource mobilization target for 2024 of USD 300 million, to come from more than the 14 contributors in 2023, by the Governments of Denmark, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Norway, the Republic of Korea, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland, as well as the governments of the Brussels-Capital and Walloon Regions of Belgium, equivalent to USD 132.85 million;
		4.	Notes with concern the outstanding pledged contributions to the Adaptation Fund and urges Parties to fulfil their pledges as soon as possible;
		5.	Encourages continued and increased voluntary contributions of financial resources to the Adaptation Fund in line with its resource mobilization strategy for 2022–2025;
		6.	Underscores the urgency of scaling up financial resources, including the provision of voluntary support, that are additional to the share of proceeds levied on certified emission reductions in order to support the resource mobilization efforts of the Adaptation Fund Board with a view to strengthening the Adaptation Fund;
		7.	Emphasizes the importance of continuing to take action to promote the adequacy and predictability of adaptation finance, including through multi-year contributions, taking into account the role of the Adaptation Fund in delivering dedicated support for adaptation;
		8.	Stresses the importance of financial contributions to the Adaptation Fund, including in the context of urging developed country Parties to at least double their collective provision of climate finance for adaptation to developing countries from 2019 levels by 2025, in the context of achieving a balance between mitigation and adaptation in the provision of scaled‑up financial resources, recalling Article 9, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement, as per paragraph 18 of decision 1/CMA.3;
		9.	Encourages the achievement of the goals set out in the Medium-Term Strategy of the Adaptation Fund for 2023–‍2027 with the expectation that its implementation will generate significant outcomes in terms of promoting locally led adaptation, scaling up projects and replicating their results, and strengthening linkages and synergies between the Strategy’s strategic pillars of action, innovation, and learning and sharing;
		10.	Welcomes the establishment by the Adaptation Fund Board of a new global aggregator programme for channelling small grants for locally led adaptation projects and programmes to non-accredited entities, and of a new funding window for regional projects and programmes on locally led adaptation, as well as the approval of 13 single-country proposals and 1 regional proposal, and notes with appreciation the efforts of developing country Parties to access funding under the Adaptation Fund for implementing concrete adaptation activities;
		11.	Welcomes the approval of additional financing and delivery partners for the global aggregator programme under the Adaptation Fund innovation facility and requests the Adaptation Fund Board to accelerate efforts to implement the programme;
		12.	Underscores the need to tailor projects to local contexts, including through initial assessments and consultations with diverse groups in line with the Adaptation Fund guidelines and policies;
		13.	Notes the increased support for readiness and capacity-building as a result of increasing project formulation grants for all projects and programmes, with additional support for locally led adaptation projects, and stresses the importance of the continuation of this work;
		14.	Takes note of the information in the report referred to in paragraph 1 above, welcomes the consideration by the Adaptation Fund Board of the funding caps, noting that the Board had requested the secretariat to prepare an analysis for consideration at its 43rd meeting, and requests the Board to complete its consideration in a timely manner;
		15.	Welcomes the decision of the Adaptation Fund Board to outline an enhanced readiness programme and looks forward to receiving an update on progress in this regard;
		16.	Welcomes the progress of the Adaptation Fund Board in implementing the updated gender policy and action plan of the Adaptation Fund and the gender scorecard, including by developing the first Adaptation Fund e-learning course on gender mainstreaming to help strengthen the capacity of implementing entities to develop gender-responsive adaptation projects, and requests the Adaptation Fund Board to further increase the gender-responsiveness of the resources of the Adaptation Fund;
		17.	Invites the Adaptation Fund Board to consider areas for improvement in the context of the gender-responsiveness of the work of the Adaptation Fund, taking into account relevant insights, including from the summary report on the 2024 Standing Committee on Finance Forum on accelerating climate action and resilience through gender-responsive finance;
		18.	Welcomes the decision of the Adaptation Fund Board to develop and adopt a stand-alone Adaptation Fund policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment and reiterates the importance of the Adaptation Fund Board completing its work in this regard;
		19.	Welcomes the decision of the Adaptation Fund Board to update and strengthen the Adaptation Fund strategic results framework in alignment with the Medium-Term Strategy of the Adaptation Fund for 2023–‍2027 and to enable reporting on the results of Adaptation Fund funded projects, in line with the global goal on adaptation;
		20.	Also welcomes the work of the Adaptation Fund Board on complementarity and coherence with other multilateral climate funds and encourages the Board to continue this work with a view to simplifying its access modalities, as appropriate, and maximizing its impact;
		21.	Welcomes the continued collaboration between the Adaptation Fund and the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network, including through the Adaptation Fund Climate Innovation Accelerator, and encourages continued collaboration in this regard;
		22.	Recognizes the potential for the share of proceeds from the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement to increase the capitalization of the Adaptation Fund;
		23.	Encourages the Adaptation Fund Board to complete, as a matter of priority, its work related to implementing its mandates in decisions 1/CMP.14 and 13/CMA.1 and to report thereon in its annual report to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its twentieth session (November 2025) and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its seventh session (November 2025);
		24.	Emphasizes the need for maintaining continuity in implementing the activities of the Adaptation Fund Board during the transition of the Adaptation Fund from the Kyoto Protocol to the Paris Agreement, including continued access of developing countries to support for adaptation;
		25.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to consider, at its sixty-second session (June 2025), the matter of the arrangements for the Adaptation Fund to exclusively serve the Paris Agreement and to make recommendations on this matter for consideration by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its seventh session;
		26.	Also requests the Adaptation Fund to provide updates on its activities and scope of support in relation to assisting developing country Parties in their efforts towards the implementation of the United Arab Emirates Framework for Global Climate Resilience, including towards achieving the targets referred to in paragraphs 9–10 of decision 2/CMA.5.
		11th plenary meeting
		23 November 2024
	
	I.	
	Decision 14/CMA.6
	Sharm el-Sheikh dialogue on the scope of Article 2, paragraph 1(c), of the Paris Agreement and its complementarity with Article 9 of the Paris Agreement
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling decisions 1/CMA.4, paragraph 68, and 9/CMA.5, paragraphs 8–14,
		1.	Welcomes with appreciation the efforts of the co-chairs of the Sharm el-Sheikh dialogue on the scope of Article 2, paragraph 1(c), of the Paris Agreement and its complementarity with Article 9 of the Paris Agreement, including to facilitate constructive and open discussions and exchange of views and information among Parties, relevant organizations and other stakeholders at the workshops held under the dialogue in 2024;
		2.	Expresses appreciation to the Government of Egypt for hosting the second workshop under the dialogue in 2024;
		3.	Notes with appreciation the 2024 report by the co-chairs on the Sharm el-Sheikh dialogue;
		4.	Encourages the co-chairs to continue enhancing their efforts to organize and conduct the workshops to be held under the dialogue in 2025 in an inclusive, open and transparent manner, including with regard to ensuring participatory representativeness, facilitating the engagement of Parties and non-Party stakeholders and aiming to have content relevant to all Parties;
		5.	Invites Parties, the UNFCCC constituted bodies, the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, climate finance institutions, observers and observer organizations, and other stakeholders, particularly from the private sector, to submit via the submission portal by 1 March 2025 views on the issues to be addressed during the workshops to be held in 2025;
		6.	Expresses gratitude to the Governments of Germany and Switzerland for their financial support for conducting activities under the dialogue in 2024.
		11th plenary meeting
		23 November 2024
	
	I.	
	Decision 15/CMA.6
	Report of developed country Parties on doubling the collective provision of climate finance for adaptation to developing country Parties from 2019 levels by 2025
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
			Recalling Article 9, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement,
			Also recalling decisions 1/CMA.3, paragraph 18, and 1/CMA.5, paragraph 100,
		Takes note of the efforts undertaken in response to paragraph 100 of decision 1/CMA.5.
			11th plenary meeting
			23 November 2024
		
		
