|  | United Nations | FCCC/PA/CMA/2022/10/Add.2 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 17 March 2023  Original: English |

Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting 
of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
Report of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement on its fourth session, held in Sharm el-Sheikh from 6 to 20 November 2022
	Addendum
	Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its fourth session
	Contents
Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
	Decision	Page
	6/CMA.4	Matters relating to cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2,
of the Paris Agreement		2
	7/CMA.4	Guidance on the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the
Paris Agreement		33
	8/CMA.4	Matters relating to the work programme under the framework for non-market
approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement		55
	9/CMA.4	Reviews on a voluntary basis of the information reported pursuant to 
decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter IV, and respective training courses needed		59
	10/CMA.4	Report of the Adaptation Committee for 2022 and review of the progress, 
effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee		61
	11/CMA.4	Matters relating to the least developed countries		62
	
	
Decision 6/CMA.4
Matters relating to cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
	Recalling Article 6, paragraph 1, Parties recognize that some Parties choose to pursue voluntary cooperation in the implementation of Parties’ nationally determined contributions to allow for higher ambition in their mitigation and adaptation actions and to promote sustainable development and environmental integrity,
	Also recalling decision 2/CMA.3 and its annex,
	Further recalling decision 1/CP.24, paragraph 43(a), according to which Parties may submit their national communication and biennial transparency report as a single report in accordance with the modalities, procedures and guidelines for the transparency framework for action and support referred to in Article 13,
	1.	Adopts:
		(a)	The guidance relating to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter VI.A (Tracking), as contained in annex I;
		(b)	The guidelines for the Article 6 technical expert review referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter V (Review), as contained in annex II;
		(c)	The outline of the Article 6 technical expert review report referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter V (Review), paragraph 27, as contained in annex III;
		(d)	The training programme for technical experts participating in the Article 6 technical expert review referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter V (Review), as contained in annex IV;
		(e)	The outline of the initial report (hereinafter referred to as initial report) and updated initial report referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV.A (Initial report), as contained in annex V;
		(f)	The outline of annex 4 (Information in relation to the Party’s participation in cooperative approaches, as applicable) to the biennial transparency report referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV.C (Regular information), as contained in annex VI;
	2.	Encourages Parties to test the draft version of the agreed electronic format referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV.B (Annual information), as contained in annex VII and to provide feedback via the submission portal by 30 April 2023;
	3.	Requests the secretariat to organize a hybrid workshop on the draft version of the agreed electronic format referred to in paragraph 2 above at least one month prior to the fifty‑eighth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (June 2023);
	4.	Also requests the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice to continue its work on the draft version of the agreed electronic format referred to in paragraph 2 above, taking into consideration the submissions from Parties on this matter also referred to in that paragraph and the workshop referred to in paragraph 3 above, with a view to finalizing a recommendation on the agreed electronic format for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its fifth session (November–December 2023);
	5.	Clarifies that the vintage of an internationally transferred mitigation outcome is the calendar year in which the underlying mitigation occurred;
	6.	Decides that a participating Party that identifies information as confidential, pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 24, should provide the basis for protecting such information;
	7.	Also decides that Article 6 technical expert review teams will follow the Article 6 technical expert review report outline contained in annex III;
	8.	Invites Parties and, as appropriate, intergovernmental organizations to nominate technical experts with the relevant qualifications to the UNFCCC roster of experts in accordance with annex II, chapter XI;
	9.	Requests the secretariat to implement and maintain the training programme for technical experts participating in Article 6 technical expert reviews pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 26, taking into account technical advice from Article 6 lead reviewers on the implementation of the training for technical experts participating in Article 6 technical expert reviews pursuant to annex II, chapter XI.C;
	10.	Also requests the secretariat to report to the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice at its fifty-eighth session on progress in developing the training programme referred to paragraph 1(d) above and at each subsequent session until development of the training programme has been completed;
	11.	Further requests the secretariat to make available as soon as possible an initial version of the courses comprising the training programme, as outlined in annex IV, and to make available no later than December 2023 the course related to the requirements of initial reports set out in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 18;
	12.	Requests the secretariat to promote geographical and gender balance among the technical experts participating in the training programme referred to in paragraph 1(d) above, to the extent possible, giving special consideration, including in terms of support for participation, to experts from developing countries, particularly the least developed countries and small island developing States;
	13.	Also requests the secretariat to include any cases of persistent inconsistencies and/or non-responsiveness by a participating Party, as contained in the recommendations arising from the Article 6 technical expert review, including responses, if any, to such recommendations that may be provided by the participating Party concerned, in the annual compilation and synthesis of the results of the Article 6 technical expert review referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, paragraph 13, and publish the information on the centralized accounting and reporting platform in a disaggregated manner in respect of each participating Party;
	14.	Invites the Committee referred to in Article 15, paragraph 2, to liaise with the Article 6 lead reviewers referred to in annex II, chapter XI.C, as needed, when cases of significant and persistent inconsistencies are identified and addressed by the Committee in accordance with decision 20/CMA.1, annex, paragraph 22(b);
	15.	Also invites Parties to submit views on options for the recommendations referred to in paragraphs 16–17 below via the submission portal for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice prior to its:
		(a)	Fifty-eighth session, in relation to paragraphs 16(a) and 17 below;
		(b)	Sixtieth session (June 2024), in relation to paragraph 16(b) below;
	16.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice to continue its work to develop, on the basis of the guidance in the annex to decision 2/CMA.3 and the further guidance in the annexes to this decision, taking into account the submissions referred to in paragraph 15 above:
		(a)	Recommendations for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its fifth session on:
			(i)	Further consideration of the special circumstances of the least developed countries and small island developing States;
			(ii)	The modalities for reviewing information that is confidential;
			(iii)	The reviews specifying recommended action to be taken when inconsistencies are identified, and provisions on how a Party should respond to those recommendations and the implications of non-responsiveness, if any;
		(b)	Recommendations for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its sixth session (November 2024) on:
			(i)	The elaboration of further guidance in relation to corresponding adjustments for multi-year and single-year nationally determined contributions, in a manner that ensures the avoidance of double counting, on:
			a.	Methods for establishing an indicative trajectory, trajectories or budget and for averaging, including with respect to relevant indicators, and for calculating cumulative emissions by sources and removals by sinks;
			b.	Methods for demonstrating the representativeness of averaging for corresponding adjustments by quantifying how much the yearly transaction volume differs from the average for the period;
				(ii)	Consideration of whether internationally transferred mitigation outcomes could include emission avoidance;
	17.	Also requests the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice, on the basis of the guidance in the annex to decision 2/CMA.3 and the further guidance in the annexes to this decision, to develop recommendations, taking into account Party submissions referred to in paragraph 15 above and giving consideration to implementation priorities, for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its fifth session, on:
		(a)	The sequencing and timing of the submission of the initial report, the completion of the Article 6 technical expert review of that report and the submission of the agreed electronic format;
		(b)	The process of authorization pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraphs 2, 18(g) and 21(c), notably the scope of changes to authorization of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes towards use(s), and the process for managing them and for authorization of entities and cooperative approaches with a view to ensuring transparency and consistency;
		(c)	The application of decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 2, on mitigation outcomes authorized by a participating Party for use towards achievement of a nationally determined contribution and for other international mitigation purposes in accordance with decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 1(d) and (f);
		(d)	Tables for submitting annual information as part of the regular information, as referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 23(j);
		(e)	Consideration of possible implications for the reporting of annual information pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraphs 20 and 23, from the application of methods for converting the non-greenhouse gas metric into tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent in accordance with decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 22(d), with a view to ensuring that the amount of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes in a non-greenhouse gas metric acquired by a participating Party does not exceed the amount of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes in the non-greenhouse gas metric of the participating Party initiating the transfer;
		(f)	The process of identifying, notifying and correcting inconsistencies in data on internationally transferred mitigation outcomes in the Article 6 database, in accordance with decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 33, and its dependence on the agreed electronic format;
		(g)	The need for additional functionalities and procedures for the international registry to allow for transfer of Article 6, paragraph 4, emission reductions to the international registry and to provide services for cooperative approaches if voluntarily requested by Parties participating in a cooperative approach, including, inter alia, additional technical functionalities and administrative arrangements, for authorizing account access, and further guidance on procedures for reporting and review for the cooperative approaches of the participating Parties requesting such services, which may be required in addition to the relevant guidance in decision 2/CMA.3 and annex I to this decision;
		(h)	The accounts of the international registry and the role of the international registry administrator, in accordance with the guidance contained in annex I;
		(i)	The submission of information by Parties using the international registry as the basis for tracking internationally transferred mitigation outcomes;
		(j)	The common nomenclatures referred to in annex I, chapter II.B, including for cooperative approaches reported by participating Parties, first transferring Party, sectors, activity types, non-greenhouse gas metrics and their units of measurement, registries that track internationally transferred mitigation outcome from cooperative approaches and action types; first transfer specifications; and purposes towards which use of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes is authorized;
	18.	Further requests the secretariat to organize a workshop before 30 April 2023, with broad participation, to enable the participatory sharing of views on potential challenges participating Parties may face in addressing different elements of the initial report and to support the identification of related capacity-building needs;
	19.	Invites Parties to submit their views on potential challenges in the preparation of the reporting on elements listed in the initial report via the submission portal;
	20.	Requests the secretariat to prepare a technical paper on the basis of issues identified at the workshop referred to in paragraph 18 above and Party submissions referred to in paragraph 19 above on potential considerations in the preparation of the reporting on elements listed in the initial report;
	21.	Invites the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice to reflect, at its fifty-eighth session, on the outcomes of the workshop referred to in paragraph 18 above and technical paper referred to in paragraph 20 above and, where appropriate, make recommendations to inform the preparation of the manual referred to in paragraph 22 below to support the submission of initial reports by participating Parties;
	22.	Requests the secretariat to develop and regularly update a manual containing illustrative elements of information for the initial report, updated initial report and annex 4 to the biennial transparency report (Regular information) to facilitate Parties’ understanding of how to report information pertaining to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraphs 18–22, taking into account the outcomes of the workshop referred to in paragraph 18 above and noting that the illustrative elements of information to be included in the manual have no formal status, are for voluntary use and shall not be used or referred to in the Article 6 technical expert review;
	23.	Also requests the secretariat to provide, as part of the capacity-building programme referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, paragraph 12, capacity-building, including by holding at least one virtual workshop, with the broad participation of Parties and prior to the fifty-eighth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice, on the use of the reporting outlines and tables, particularly in relation to the completion and submission of initial reports;
	24.	Further requests the secretariat to expedite the implementation of the capacity-building programme referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, paragraph 12, within a time frame in which elements are prioritized that are more urgent and relevant to enabling Parties to participate in cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, taking into account the work it has already initiated under the capacity-building programme, and to report regularly on the status of its implementation to the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
	25.	Requests the secretariat, as a matter of priority, to develop the centralized accounting and reporting platform and the Article 6 database referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraphs 32 and 35, on the basis of the relevant guidance contained in annex I, chapters II–‍III, and to make available a test version by June 2024 with a view to the first version being finalized by June 2025;
	26.	Also requests the secretariat, as part of the implementation of the centralized accounting and reporting platform and the Article 6 database, to make the detailed requirements of the platform and database available to Parties before the fifty-eighth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice to allow Parties to provide views thereon via the submission portal within four weeks of publication of the requirements;
	27.	Invites Parties to submit views on their experience with the test version of the centralized accounting and reporting platform and the Article 6 database and any inputs on improving these systems via the submission portal within eight weeks of the release of the test version;
	28.	Requests the secretariat to provide an interim solution by January 2023 for the submission of information pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV (Reporting), until the centralized accounting and reporting platform and the Article 6 database are released to enable participating Parties to make submissions, taking into account that the interim solution shall enable the publishing of non-confidential information pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 24;
	29.	Strongly encourages participating Parties, in preparing tables for the submission of information in relation to quantitative information as per decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraphs 20 and 23, to use the pre-consistency check function of the centralized accounting and reporting platform when it is made available, which shall not supersede the performance of the consistency check after this information is submitted;
	30.	Requests the secretariat to develop and maintain the necessary processes and guidelines for the submission and processing of the information referred to in paragraphs 1(e‍–‍f) and 2 above, including in relation to the consistency check referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 33(a), and to publish a user manual, including in a user-friendly online version, for the Article 6 database and any supporting features and functionalities of the centralized accounting and reporting platform in line with the timeline for its implementation referred to in paragraph 25 above;
	31.	Also requests the secretariat to explore opportunities for streamlining the process of making submissions under Articles 6 and 13, including by integrating the submission portal of the centralized accounting and reporting platform referred to in annex I, paragraph 30(b), with the submission portal for Article 13 reporting with a view to efficiently managing the submission of information required under both Articles 6 and 13;
	32.	Further requests the secretariat to develop, publish and periodically update, for participating Parties opting to apply the guidance referred to in annex I, chapter I.B, standards and recommended practices for electronic recording of data and information related to internationally transferred mitigation outcomes, and communication standards for interoperability and transactions with internationally transferred mitigation outcomes, including record-keeping arrangements, data security protocols, risk management and disaster recovery procedures, and other practices, as necessary, including with inputs from the forum referred to in paragraph 34 below, and to publish relevant outputs in a dedicated area on the centralized accounting and reporting platform;
	33.	Requests the secretariat, pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 30, to:
		(a)	Implement the international registry in accordance with the guidance contained in annex I, chapter I.C, while prioritizing the requirements as per annex I, chapter I.A–B, and make it available to participating Parties not later than 2024;
		(b)	Provide an interim solution for participating Parties until the international registry becomes operational;
		(c)	Make available, as part of the implementation, the technical specifications and associated cost estimates for the international registry to Parties before the fifty-eighth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice for comment via the submission portal within four weeks of their publication;
		(d)	Develop and implement the necessary processes and procedures for operating the international registry;
	34.	Also requests the secretariat to establish a voluntary forum of Article 6 registry system administrators and technical experts of participating Parties to facilitate cooperation among them, including sharing knowledge and experience in the context of implementing and operating infrastructure, and to provide input to the further development and implementation of infrastructure, as necessary;
	35.	Further requests the secretariat to establish an online platform for information exchange and to support the forum of Article 6 registry system administrators in identifying topics of interest and relevant activities, including for public engagement;
	36.	Encourages participating Parties to prepare their initial report, updated initial report and annex 4 to the biennial transparency report (Regular information) in accordance with the outlines contained in annexes V and VI respectively, as referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV.A (Initial report) and IV.C (Regular information);
	37.	Reiterates the principle of avoiding duplication of work and minimizing the burden on Parties and the secretariat referred to in annex II, paragraph 1(d), in relation to the Article 6 technical expert review of cooperative approaches;
	38.	Requests the secretariat to prepare a technical paper on options for funding the activities related to the infrastructure and the Article 6 technical expert review under Article 6, paragraph 2, for consideration by the subsidiary bodies at their fifty-eighth sessions;
	39.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in this decision;
	40.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	

Annex I*
Guidance relating to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter VI (Recording and tracking)
	I.	Guidance relating to the registries referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 29
		A.	Form, functions and processes
			1.	Each Party participating in a cooperative approach referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, shall have, or have access to, a registry for the purpose of tracking that:
				(a)	Has accounts for ITMOs, as necessary;
				(b)	Records the actions relating to ITMOs, including authorization, first transfer, transfer, acquisition, use towards NDCs, authorization for use towards other international mitigation purposes and voluntary cancellation (including for overall mitigation in global emissions, if applicable);
				(c)	Tracks, maintains records and accounts for ITMOs, including through unique identifiers;
				(d)	Provides access to the Party and other entities for which access is authorized by the Party to implement the actions referred to in paragraph 1(b) above;
				(e)	Produces, maintains and compiles records, information and data consistently with the annual information submitted in the agreed electronic format.
			2.	Electronic arrangements and other technical and administrative arrangements for registries shall be based on software that enables tracking and recording of ITMOs. Such registries should be maintained in accordance with administrative procedures and precautions to avoid or control risks relating to the consistency of data.
			1.	Tracking and recording methods
				3.	Each participating Party shall track and record ITMOs from a cooperative approach consistently during the NDC implementation period.
				4.	ITMOs shall be uniquely identified in a way that renders ITMOs traceable to the mitigation outcome(s) represented.
				5.	Each ITMO shall have a unique identifier. The unique identifier for each ITMO shall comprise at the minimum:
					(a)	The identifier of the cooperative approach;
					(b)	The identifier of the originating Party registry;
					(c)	The identifier of the first transferring Party;
					(d)	The serial number;
					(e)	The vintage of the underlying mitigation outcome.
				6.	ITMOs can be tracked and reported in blocks.
			2.	Actions and records
				7.	Each participating Party shall ensure that the registry records information and data on authorization, first transfer, transfer, acquisition, use towards NDCs, authorization for use towards other international mitigation purposes and voluntary cancellation (including for overall mitigation in global emissions, if applicable).
				8.	Each participating Party shall, in implementing its registry, achieve data integrity in tracking and recording ITMOs and enable reporting consistent with the agreed electronic format.
		B.	Interoperability
			9.	Where participating Party registries are interoperable, the Parties participating in a cooperative approach shall, for the purpose of transferring ITMOs, implement appropriate standards and procedures to mitigate risks to the consistency of data, including through communication of data about the transfer and reconciliation procedures within and between registries.
			10.	Interoperability of registries should be implemented in such a way that neither Party to an inter-registry transfer could later repudiate the existence, type, time or content of the transfer.
		C.	Guidance relating to the international registry referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 30
			11.	The international registry is a consolidated system comprising each participating Party’s registry sections, with each section performing the functions set out in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 29, and chapter I.A–B above.
			12.	The international registry shall consist of Party-specific sections and a section for the administrator of the international registry.
			13.	International registry sections shall be isolated from each other on the user interface platform while maintaining the cross-sectional consistency of data.
			14.	The secretariat, in implementing the international registry, shall strive to minimize its development and operational costs while ensuring that the international registry meets the necessary security and quality expectations.
			1.	Accounts and actions
				15.	The international registry shall, for the purpose of tracking and recording ITMOs, comprise an electronic database and other technical and administrative arrangements and support the accounts and perform the operations set out in paragraph 1 above.
				16.	Accounts shall enable the tracking and recording of information in relation to the ITMO actions they record.
			2.	Processes
				(a)	Roles of administrators
				17.	The secretariat fulfils the role of the administrator of the international registry, including developing and maintaining:
					(a)	The international registry software;
					(b)	Change management procedures, operational level agreements, hosting and synchronization of nomenclature with the centralized accounting and reporting platform;
					(c)	Procedures for corrective actions to ensure the consistency and correct accounting of ITMOs;
					(d)	Standards and procedures for interoperability with other registries and procedures for implementing interoperability, while ensuring that the costs and burden related to such interoperability are minimized.
				18.	Each participating Party that uses the international registry is responsible for tracking the underlying mitigation activities and mitigation outcomes and ensuring avoidance of double counting.
					(b)	Other
				19.	The international registry administrator shall assist the least developed countries and small island developing States that use the international registry with functions and processes, as necessary, subject to the availability of financial resources.
				20.	The international registry shall enable, for each participating Party, the automatic pre- filling of the agreed electronic format and of other quantitative information requirements pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV (Reporting), including in relation to authorized Article 6, paragraph 4, emission reductions.
				21.	The international registry shall enable the production and dissemination of reports to the designated registry administrators of participating Parties on the history of holdings and actions in relation to accounts associated with the respective participating Parties.
				22.	The international registry shall make non-confidential information publicly available and provide a publicly accessible user interface through the web portal of the centralized accounting and reporting platform.
			3.	Interoperability
				(a)	Connection of the mechanism registry to the international registry
				23.	Pursuant to decision 3/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 63, the mechanism registry is connected to the international registry. The connection of the mechanism registry to the international registry shall, at a minimum, enable the functions referred to in paragraphs 9–10 above and be implemented in accordance with future decisions of the CMA.
					(b)	Connection of participating Party registries to the international registry
				24.	A participating Party may connect its registry to the international registry. Such connections shall apply the interoperability arrangements applicable to all registries as described in chapter I.B above and other relevant future decisions of the CMA.
	II.	Guidance relating to the centralized accounting and reporting platform referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 26
		A.	Form and functions
			25.	The centralized accounting and reporting platform referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 35, supports the review referred to in chapter V (Review) of the same decision and provides transparency in relation to cooperative approaches by publishing information submitted by participating Parties pursuant to chapter IV (Reporting) of the same decision.
			26.	The centralized accounting and reporting platform shall be implemented as a digital web-based platform and shall contain the international registry and the Article 6 database referred to in the annex to decision 2/CMA.3 as distinct parts.
			27.	The centralized accounting and reporting platform shall house or provide:
				(a)	Templates for tables and outlines of the information to be reported pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV (Reporting);
				(b)	A submission portal for participating Parties to submit information pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV (Reporting). The submission portal shall have a human- and machine-readable interface for uploading information, including for recording data in the Article 6 database. The submission portal shall enable automated pre-checks of the draft submissions, including on the basis of the information recorded in the Article 6 database, that provide feedback to the submitting Party about apparent or potential inconsistencies prior to submission of information;
				(c)	Workflows for processing submissions;
				(d)	Safe storage for submitted information;
				(e)	An area for each participating Party, accessible after valid authentication, to support the preparation of its submissions pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV (Reporting), and to support communications with the secretariat and the Article 6 technical expert review teams. The participating Party shall have access to reporting tables and outlines of information that are automatically pre-filled with information previously submitted through electronic templates;
				(f)	An area for Article 6 technical expert review teams, accessible after valid authentication, to access information relevant to reviews assigned to them, including confidential information, and to support communications with the secretariat and Parties undergoing an Article 6 technical expert review. This area may use information compilers, checklists and review tools;
				(g)	A public interface.
		B.	Common nomenclatures
			28.	The centralized accounting and reporting platform shall enable the management of a common list of values for specific information attributes required for the reporting of annual information in accordance with decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV (Reporting) (hereinafter referred to as common nomenclatures).
			29.	Common nomenclatures shall be managed through a process for requesting the establishment of and changes to common nomenclatures.
			30.	The secretariat or participating Parties may identify the need for and request the establishment of further common nomenclatures.
			31.	A common nomenclature shall comprise unique elements (values), which shall be assigned by the centralized accounting and reporting platform. Common nomenclature elements shall be robust and immutable. New common nomenclatures or new elements may be added to existing nomenclatures and elements. When changes to common nomenclatures and their elements are unavoidable, a manual review of the impact on existing operations and assessment of possible remediations or mitigations shall be carried out by the secretariat, including through consultations with participating Parties, as appropriate.
	III.	Guidance relating to the Article 6 database referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 32
		A.	Form and functions
			32.	The Article 6 database referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 32, records and compiles the information submitted by participating Parties pursuant to chapter IV.B (Annual information) and IV.C (Regular information) of the annex to the same decision and supports the review referred to in chapter V (Review) of the annex to the same decision, including the recording of corresponding adjustments and emissions balances and information on ITMOs first transferred, transferred, acquired, held, cancelled, cancelled for overall mitigation in global emissions, if any, and/or used by participating Parties.
			33.	The Article 6 database shall record the unique identifiers for ITMOs contained in the registries by receiving the unique identifiers via the agreed electronic format. Each unique identifier shall remain unchanged throughout this process.
			34.	The Article 6 database shall be implemented as an integrated but distinct database within the centralized accounting and reporting platform, and an Article 6 database data model shall be designed on the basis of the agreed electronic format for submission of annual information to the Article 6 database.
			35.	The Article 6 database shall enable the compilation of annual information submitted by a participating Party for inclusion in the format for the structured summary, required pursuant to decision 18/CMA.1, annex, paragraph 77(d), as part of the biennial transparency report.
			36.	The publishing of non-confidential information stored in the Article 6 database, including in relation to the results of the consistency check, as per decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 33(a), shall be done through the public interface of the centralized accounting and reporting platform.
		B.	Consistency check procedure
			37.	Pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 32(b), the Article 6 database shall automate the identification of inconsistencies in submitted annual information and notify the participating Party or participating Parties, as applicable, of such inconsistencies.
			38.	The Article 6 database shall automate the consistency check as per decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 33(a).
			39.	The Article 6 database shall identify inconsistencies and unavailability of annual information by performing consistency checks on the accuracy and completeness of the information in accordance with the relevant requirements of decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV.B (Annual information) and IV.C (Regular information). The consistency checks shall extend to the reported information of all Parties participating in a cooperative approach in respect of that cooperative approach, including by comparing amounts first transferred or transferred and acquired between participating Parties.
			40.	The Article 6 database, through the submission portal of the centralized accounting and reporting platform, shall make available to participating Parties a pre-submission consistency check option for draft annual information for voluntary use by Parties.
Annex II*
	Guidelines for the Article 6 technical expert review referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter V (Review)
		I.	Guiding principles
			1.	The guiding principles of the guidelines for the Article 6 technical expert review pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter V (Review), are as follows:
				(a)	Promote transparency, accuracy, completeness, consistency and comparability;
				(b)	Facilitate the application of robust accounting for engagement in the cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2;
				(c)	Acknowledge the importance of facilitating improved reporting and transparency over time;
				(d)	Avoid duplication of work and minimize the burden on Parties and the secretariat, including by leveraging capabilities available through the centralized accounting and reporting platform in preparing for and carrying out reviews.
		II.	Scope
			2.	An Article 6 technical expert review consists of:
				(a)	A review of the consistency of the information, including on each cooperative approach, submitted by the participating Party in its initial report with the requirements of decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 18;
				(b)	A review of the consistency of the information for each further cooperative approach submitted by the participating Party in an updated initial report with the requirements of decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 18(g–i);
				(c)	A review of the consistency of the information in relation to its participation in cooperative approaches submitted by the participating Party in its regular information as an annex to the biennial transparency report with the requirements of decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraphs 21–23;
				(d)	A consideration of the results of the consistency check referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 33(a), performed by the secretariat on the information submitted by the participating Party for recording in the Article 6 database referred to in the annex to decision 2/CMA.3 with respect to the requirements set out in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV (Reporting), including across participating Parties for each cooperative approach in which the Party under review participates.
			3.	Information submitted by a participating Party is considered to be consistent with these guidelines when all of the following requirements are met:
				(a)	The information is complete, transparent and consistent with the annex to decision 2/CMA.3 and any future relevant decisions of the CMA;
				(b)	The information is consistent across the different reporting requirements, namely the initial report, updated initial report, and annual information and regular information annexes to the biennial transparency report, as well as the structured summary (required pursuant to decision 18/CMA.1, annex, para. 77(d), as part of the biennial transparency report) in which annual information is included, to the extent possible;
				(c)	The information is consistent across all Parties participating in the same cooperative approach, as relevant and to the extent possible.
			4.	The Party under review shall indicate in its submission if information from other participating Parties in the same cooperative approach(es) is unavailable, to the extent possible.
			5.	An Article 6 technical expert review shall specify recommended actions to be taken by the participating Party, including recommendations on:
				(a)	How to improve consistency with the requirements of the annex to decision 2/CMA.3 and any future relevant decisions of the CMA;
				(b)	How to address identified inconsistencies in quantified information that is reported under chapter IV.B (Annual information) and IV.C (Regular information) of the annex to decision 2/CMA.3 and/or identified by the secretariat as part of the consistency check.
			6.	An Article 6 technical expert review team shall also consider any recommendations on inconsistency and areas for improvement identified in previous Article 6 technical expert review reports for the participating Party, if any, and reiterate those recommendations in cases of non-responsiveness of the participating Party in its latest submission.
			7.	An Article 6 technical expert review team may identify capacity-building needs and areas for improvement in consultation with the participating Party.
			8.	The Article 6 technical expert review team shall pay particular attention to the respective national capabilities and circumstances of participating developing country Parties and recognize the special circumstances of the least developed countries and small island developing States.
			9.	The Article 6 technical expert review shall be implemented in a facilitative, non-intrusive, non-punitive manner, respectful of national sovereignty and avoid placing undue burden on participating Parties.
			10.	The Article 6 technical expert review teams shall not:
				(a)	Make political judgments;
				(b)	Review the adequacy or appropriateness of a Party’s NDC under Article 4;
				(c)	Review the adequacy or appropriateness of:
					(i)	A cooperative approach in which a Party is participating and associated descriptions;
					(ii)	The activities under the cooperative approach;
					(iii)	The authorization of a cooperative approach or ITMOs from a cooperative approach towards use(s).
		III.	Information to be reviewed
			11.	Information submitted by a Party participating in a cooperative approach under Article 6, paragraph 2, shall undergo an Article 6 technical expert review consistently with these guidelines. The reviews encompass:
				(a)	The initial report and updated initial report, as referred to in paragraph 2(a–b) above, submitted by each participating Party;
				(b)	Regular information, as an annex to a biennial transparency report, as referred to in paragraph 2(c) above, submitted by each participating Party.
				(c)	The information referred to in paragraph 2(d) above.
		IV.	Timing and sequencing of review
			12.	The initial reports and updated initial reports submitted during a three-month calendar period or a six-month calendar period shall undergo an Article 6 technical expert review following the calendar period in which they were submitted. Where an initial report or updated initial report for a Party is submitted at the same time as the Party’s regular information, the initial report or updated initial report and regular information may be reviewed together in a single Article 6 technical expert review.
		V.	Article 6 technical expert review format
			A.	Definitions
				13.	An Article 6 technical expert review shall be conducted as a centralized review or desk review.
				14.	A centralized review is when the members of an Article 6 technical expert review team conduct the review from a single, centralized location; this review includes the possibility for remote participation for technical experts who need it in the light of their circumstances.
				15.	During a centralized review, a single Article 6 technical expert review team may review several participating Parties, including those participating in the same cooperative approach(es), to the extent possible.
				16.	A desk review is when the members of an Article 6 technical expert review team conduct the review remotely from their respective countries.
			B.	Applicability
				17.	A centralized review shall be conducted:
					(a)	For the regular information annex to the first biennial transparency report or to the biennial transparency report that contains information on a Party’s achievement of its NDC under Article 4;
					(b)	Whenever Parties participating in the same cooperative approach(es) are reviewed simultaneously.
				18.	A centralized or desk review shall be conducted in all cases other than those specified in paragraph 17 above, as appropriate.
				19.	The review format for information submitted with a biennial transparency report should align with the format of the technical expert review referred to in decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter VII, whenever possible.
				20.	The least developed countries and small island developing States may choose to participate in the same centralized review as a group, to the extent possible.
		VI.	Procedures
			21.	For centralized and desk reviews:
				(a)	The secretariat shall commence the preparation of the review process immediately following the submission of information specified in chapter II above and agree with the participating Party the dates of the Article 6 technical expert review week at least eight weeks prior to that week;
				(b)	The secretariat shall make every effort to schedule a simultaneous centralized review for Parties participating in the same cooperative approach(es);
				(c)	The secretariat shall compose a technical expert review team at least six weeks prior to the Article 6 technical expert review week;
				(d)	The Article 6 technical expert review team shall conduct a thorough and comprehensive assessment of the submitted information;
				(e)	The Article 6 technical expert review team should communicate any preliminary questions and the secretariat should provide the results of the completeness check referred to in paragraph 29 below to the participating Party at least four weeks prior to the Article 6 technical expert review week. The participating Party under review should make every reasonable effort to provide the requested information and comments on the completeness check the week prior to the Article 6 technical expert review week. The Article 6 technical expert review team may request additional information from the participating Party before or during the Article 6 technical expert review week, ensuring that any additional information requested from the participating Party is relevant to the reporting requirement in decision 2/CMA.3;
				(f)	The Article 6 technical expert review team shall, under its collective responsibility, prepare a draft technical expert review report including recommendations and through the secretariat send it to the participating Party under review during the Article 6 review week. The secretariat shall organize a teleconference with the participating Party and the Article 6 expert review team to consider draft recommendations before the end of the review week. The participating Party concerned shall be given up to two weeks from the receipt of the draft review report to provide comments;
				(g)	The Article 6 technical expert review team shall prepare the final version of the Article 6 technical expert review report, taking into account the comments of the participating Party, within two weeks of receipt of the comments from the participating Party, and forward the final version of the Article 6 technical expert review report through the secretariat for consideration during the technical expert review referred to in decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter VII;
				(h)	The final version of the Article 6 technical expert review report shall be made publicly available on the centralized accounting and reporting platform. Taking into account the procedures in this paragraph, the Article 6 technical expert review team shall make every effort to complete the Article 6 technical expert review report as early as possible. The Article 6 technical expert review report shall be published no later than the start of the technical expert review week referred to in decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter VII, for the Party under review in order to be considered;
				(i)	The Article 6 technical expert review report on the initial report shall be completed in advance of the completion of the review of any other information submitted by the Party under review.
		VII.	Confidentiality
			22.	The participating Party may designate information provided to the Article 6 technical expert review team during the review as confidential. In such cases, the participating Party should provide the basis for protecting the confidentiality of such information, and the Article 6 technical expert review team and the secretariat shall not make the information publicly available on the centralized accounting and reporting platform, in accordance with decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 24, or in any other way. The obligation of the members of the Article 6 technical expert review team to maintain confidentiality continues after the completion of the Article 6 technical expert review.
			23.	When confidential information is to be reviewed, the Article 6 technical expert review team shall report in the Article 6 technical expert review report the inconsistencies found in the confidential information, if applicable, ensuring that any review process for confidential information and any reporting arising from the review process does not directly or indirectly compromise the confidentiality of the information.
		VIII.	Role of the Party
			24.	The participating Party under review shall cooperate with the Article 6 technical expert review team and the secretariat and make every reasonable effort to respond to all questions and provide additional clarifying information and comments in a timely manner, including through the resubmission of information as necessary, prior to the finalization of the Article 6 technical expert review report.
			25.	The participating Party under review shall make every reasonable effort to resolve any inconsistencies in its reporting in accordance with the findings of the consistency checks and recommendations specified by the Article 6 technical expert review teams in the period before the next submission of information as per decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV (Reporting).
		IX.	Role of the Article 6 technical expert review team
			26.	Technical experts, in conducting Article 6 technical expert reviews, shall adhere to these guidelines and the annex to decision 2/CMA.3 and any future relevant decisions of the CMA.
			27.	Technical experts shall participate in the Article 6 technical expert review in their individual expert capacity.
		X.	Role of the secretariat
			28.	The secretariat shall organize Article 6 technical expert reviews, including the provision of a schedule that coordinates with the schedule of the technical expert review referred to in decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter VII, logistical and administrative arrangements for the review, and review tools and materials. The secretariat shall also ensure that the Article 6 technical expert review team members have access to information in the centralized accounting and reporting platform and the Article 6 database relevant to the participating Party under review, including in relation to other participating Parties in the cooperative approach(es) of the participating Party under review.
			29.	In compiling the information for the Article 6 technical expert review, the secretariat shall conduct a completeness check of the information for consideration by the Article 6 technical expert review team.
			30.	The secretariat, together with the Article 6 lead reviewers (see chap. XI.C below), shall facilitate communication between the Party under review and the Article 6 technical expert review team.
			31.	The secretariat, under the guidance of the Article 6 lead reviewers, shall compile and edit the final Article 6 technical expert review reports.
			32.	The secretariat shall facilitate annual meetings of the Article 6 lead reviewers, where possible, in conjunction with the annual meeting of lead reviewers under Article 13.
			33.	The secretariat shall develop and implement the training programme for technical experts participating in the Article 6 technical expert reviews, as outlined in annex IV to this decision.
			34.	The secretariat shall notify other Parties participating in the same cooperative approach(es) as the Party under review when the Article 6 technical review report is published.
		XI.	Article 6 technical expert review team and institutional arrangements
			A.	General
				35.	Technical experts shall be nominated to the UNFCCC roster of experts by Parties to the Paris Agreement and, as appropriate, by intergovernmental organizations.
				36.	Technical experts shall complete the training programme for the Article 6 technical experts referred to in paragraph 33 above prior to serving on an Article 6 technical expert review team.
				37.	Each submission that triggers an Article 6 technical expert review will be assigned to a single Article 6 technical expert review team with members selected from the UNFCCC roster of experts.
			B.	Composition
				38.	Technical experts shall have recognized competence in the area of Article 6 technical expert reviews.
				39.	The secretariat shall compose a technical review team in such a way that the collective skills and competencies of the technical expert review teams correspond to the information to be reviewed and that a single Article 6 technical expert team includes at least two experts.
				40.	At least one team member should be fluent in a language of the participating Party under review, if possible.
				41.	The secretariat shall select the members of the Article 6 technical expert review team with a view to achieving a balance between experts from developed and developing country Parties. The secretariat shall ensure geographical and gender balance among the technical experts, to the extent possible. When selecting members of the technical expert review team for centralized reviews of submissions from the least developed countries and small island developing States, the secretariat shall strive to include technical experts from the least developed countries and small island developing States, while at the same time ensuring that those experts do not participate in reviews for the Party that nominated them to the UNFCCC roster of experts.
				42.	The same Article 6 technical expert review team shall not perform two successive reviews of a participating Party’s submission.
				43.	The Article 6 technical expert review team shall include two co-lead reviewers, one from a developed country Party and the other from a developing country Party, that have not been nominated to the UNFCCC roster of experts by the participating Party under review.
				44.	The secretariat, in selecting lead reviewers, should consider their relevant experience, noting that experience in conducting Article 6 technical expert reviews will develop as the review process evolves.
				45.	Experts from developing country Parties participating in the Article 6 technical expert review team shall be funded according to the existing procedures for participation in UNFCCC activities.
			C.	Article 6 lead reviewers
				46.	Article 6 lead reviewers shall oversee the work of the Article 6 technical expert review team in accordance with these guidelines.
				47.	Article 6 lead reviewers shall ensure that the Article 6 technical expert reviews in which they participate are conducted in accordance with these guidelines. Article 6 lead reviewers shall ensure the quality and objectivity of the Article 6 technical expert review, the continuity and consistency of reviews for all participating Parties, and the timeliness of the reviews.
				48.	Article 6 lead reviewers shall communicate necessary information to the Article 6 technical expert review team, monitor the progress of the Article 6 technical expert review, coordinate the submission of queries of the Article 6 technical expert review team to the participating Party under review and coordinate the inclusion of the responses of the Party in the Article 6 technical expert review report, reiterate issues raised in previous Article 6 technical expert review reports, and provide technical advice to the members of the Article 6 technical expert review team.
				49.	At the request of the Paris Agreement Implementation and Compliance Committee, Article 6 lead reviewers should liaise with the Paris Agreement Implementation and Compliance Committee in cases of significant and persistent inconsistencies in accordance with paragraph 17(f) of this decision, and decision 20/CMA.1, annex, paragraph 22(b).
				50.	Article 6 lead reviewers shall meet annually at the Article 6 lead reviewers’ meeting to discuss how to improve the quality, efficiency and consistency of Article 6 technical expert reviews and shall develop conclusions on the basis of these discussions as an input to Article 6 technical expert review practice.
		XII.	Article 6 technical expert review report
			51.	The Article 6 technical expert review report shall contain the results of the Article 6 technical expert review, in accordance with the scope of the Article 6 technical expert review identified in chapter II above.
			52.	Article 6 technical expert review teams will follow the Article 6 technical expert review report outlines contained in annex III to this decision.
			53.	Article 6 technical expert review reports shall be made publicly available on the UNFCCC website via the centralized accounting and reporting platform.
Annex III*
	Outline of the Article 6 technical expert review report
		[English only]
		I.	Outline of the Article 6 technical expert review report on the initial report and updated initial report referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter V (Review)
			Abbreviations and acronyms
		I.	Introduction and summary
			A.	Introduction
			B.	Process overview
			C.	Scope of the review
			D.	Summary
			E.	Information provided by the Party pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV.A (Initial report)
		II.	Technical review of the information reported
			A.	A review of the consistency of the information submitted by the Party under Article 6, paragraph 2, with decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraphs 18–19, and any future relevant decisions by the CMA (annex II, para. 2(a–b))
			B.	Identification of capacity-building needs and areas of improvement for the Party related to the implementation of Article 6, paragraph 2, and decision 2/CMA.3 (annex II, para. 7)
			C.	Recommendations identified by the technical expert review teams in previous technical reviews that the Party has not resolved
		III.	Conclusions and recommendations
			Annex
				Documents and information received and used during the review
		II.	Outline of the Article 6 technical expert review report on the regular information annex to the biennial transparency report referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter V (Review)
			Abbreviations and acronyms
		I.	Introduction and summary
			A.	Introduction
			B.	Process overview
			C.	Scope of the review
			D.	Summary
			E.	Information provided by the Party pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV.C (Regular information)
		II.	Technical review of the information reported
			A.	A review of the consistency of the information submitted by the Party under Article 6, paragraph 2, with decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraphs 21–23, and any future relevant decisions by the CMA (annex II, para. 2(c–d))
			B.	Identification of capacity-building needs and areas of improvement for the Party related to the implementation of Article 6, paragraph 2, and decision 2/CMA.3 (annex II, para. 7)
			C.	Recommendations identified by the technical expert review teams in previous technical reviews that the Party has not resolved
		III.	Conclusions and recommendations
			Annex
				Documents and information received and used during the review
				
Annex IV*
	Training programme for technical experts participating in the Article 6 technical expert review
		[English only]
		I.	General
			1.	The aim of the training programme is to train technical experts participating in the Article 6 technical expert review.
		II.	Availability
			2.	The training programme will be available to experts included on the UNFCCC roster of experts.
			3.	All courses will be available online all year round, with an option to download them.
		III.	Examinations
			4.	All courses will have an examination.
			5.	Examination procedures will be standardized, objective and transparent.
			6.	Examinations will be offered either online or in person. When participants attend an in-person training seminar, the examination may take place during that seminar. Other arrangements for examinations may also be made, provided that the examinations take place under the supervision of the secretariat.
		IV.	Instructed courses
			7.	Once a year, online training courses facilitated by instructor(s) will be available. In-person training seminars will also be available. Additional regional training seminars targeted at technical experts from developing country Parties, particularly the least developed countries and small island developing States, may be organized.
		V.	Courses of the training programme
			8.	The following courses relating to the review of information submitted pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV (Reporting), will be included in the training programme:
				(a)	Requirements of the initial report (decision 2/CMA.3, annex, para. 18);
				(b)	Requirements of the regular and annual information (decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paras. 20, 22 and 23).
				(a)	
Annex V*
	Outline of the initial report and updated initial report referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV.A (Initial report)
		[English only]
		I.	Participation responsibilities (para. 18(a))
			A.	Information on how the Party ensures that it is a Party to the Paris Agreement (para. 18(a), para. 4(a), to be updated by para. 21(a))
			B.	Information on how the Party ensures that it has prepared, has communicated and is maintaining an NDC in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 2 (para. 18(a), para. 4(b), to be updated by para. 21(a))
			C.	Information on how the Party ensures it has arrangements in place for authorizing the use of ITMOs towards achievement of NDCs pursuant to Article 6, paragraph 3 (para. 18(a), para. 4(c), to be updated by para. 21(a))
			D.	Information on how the Party ensures it has arrangements in place that are consistent with the Article 6, paragraph 2, guidance and relevant decisions of the CMA for tracking ITMOs (para. 18(a), para. 4(d), to be updated by para. 21(a))
			E.	Information on whether the most recent national inventory report required in accordance with decision 18/CMA.1 has been provided (para. 18(a), para. 4(e), to be updated by para. 21(a))
			F.	Information on how the Party ensures participation contributes to the implementation of its NDC and long-term low-emission development strategy, if it has submitted one, and the long-term goals of the Paris Agreement (para. 18(a), para. 4(f), to be updated by para. 21(a))
		II.	Description of the Party’s NDC, as referred to in decision 18/CMA.1, annex, paragraph 64, where a participating Party has not yet submitted a biennial transparency report (para. 18(b), to be updated by para. 21(b))
			A.	Target(s) and description, including target type(s) (decision 18/CMA.1, annex, para. 64(a))
			B.	Target year(s) or period(s), and whether they are single-year or multi-year target(s) (decision 18/CMA.1, annex, para. 64(b))
			C.	Reference point(s), level(s), baseline(s), base year(s) or starting point(s), and their respective value(s) (decision 18/CMA.1, annex, para. 64(c))
			D.	Time frame(s) and/or periods for implementation (decision 18/CMA.1, annex, para. 64(d))
			E.	Scope and coverage, including, as relevant, sectors, categories, activities, sources and sinks, pools and gases (decision 18/CMA.1, annex, para. 64(e))
			F.	Intention to use cooperative approaches that involve the use of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes under Article 6 towards NDCs under Article 4 (decision 18/CMA.1, annex, para. 64(f))
			G.	Any updates or clarifications of previously reported information (e.g. recalculation of previously reported inventory data, or greater detail on methodologies or use of cooperative approaches) (decision 18/CMA.1, annex, para. 64(g))
		III.	Information on ITMO metrics, method for applying corresponding adjustments and method for quantification of the NDC (para. 18(c–f))
			A.	ITMO metrics (para. 18(c))
			B.	Method for applying corresponding adjustments as per chapter III.B (Application of corresponding adjustments) (para. 18(c))
				1.	Description of the method for applying corresponding adjustment for multi-year or single-year NDCs that will be applied consistently throughout the period of NDC implementation, if applicable (para. 18(c))
				2.	Description of the method for applying corresponding adjustments where the method is a multi-year emissions trajectory, trajectories or budget, if applicable (para. 18(c))
			C.	Quantification of the Party’s mitigation information in its NDC in t CO2 eq, including the sectors, sources, GHGs and time periods covered by the NDC, the reference level of emissions and removals for the relevant year or period, and the target level for its NDC or, where this is not possible, the methodology for the quantification of the NDC in t CO2 eq (para. 18(d))
			D.	Quantification of the Party’s NDC, or the portion in the relevant non-GHG indicator, in a non-GHG metric determined by each participating Party, if applicable (para. 18(e))
			E.	For a first or first updated NDC consisting of policies and measures that is not quantified, information on quantification of the Party’s emission level resulting from the policies and measures that are relevant to the implementation of the cooperative approach and its mitigation activities for the categories of anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks, as identified by the first transferring Party pursuant to paragraph 10, and the time periods covered by the NDC (para. 18(f))
		IV.	Information on each cooperative approach (para. 18(g–i), para. 19)
			Note: For the initial report and the updated initial report, chapters A–H below should be repeated for each cooperative approach. For each further cooperative approach, each participating Party shall submit the information referred to in paragraph 18(g–i) of the annex to decision 2/CMA.3 in an updated initial report (decision 2/CMA.3, annex, para. 19).
				A.	Copy of the authorization by the participating Party (para. 18(g))
				B.	Description of the cooperative approach (para. 18(g))
				C.	Duration of the cooperative approach (para. 18(g))
				D.	Expected mitigation for each year of the duration of the cooperative approach (para. 18(g))
				E.	Participating Parties involved in the cooperative approach (para. 18(g))
				F.	Authorized entities (para. 18(g))
				G.	Description of how the cooperative approach ensures environmental integrity (para. 18(h), to be updated by para. 22(b))
					1.	Description of how the cooperative approach ensures that there is no net increase in global emissions within and between NDC implementation periods (para. 18(h)(i), to be updated by para. 22(b)(i))
					2.	Description of how the cooperative approach ensures environmental integrity through robust, transparent governance and the quality of mitigation outcomes, including through conservative reference levels and baselines set in a conservative way and below ‘business as usual’ emission projections (including by taking into account all existing policies and addressing uncertainties in quantification and potential leakage) (para. 18(h)(ii), to be updated by para. 22(b)(ii))
					3.	Description of how the cooperative approach is minimizing the risk of non-permanence of mitigation across several NDC periods and how, when reversals of emission reductions or removals occur, the cooperative approach will ensure that these are addressed in full (para. 18(h)(iii), to be updated by para. 22(b)(iii))
				H.	Additional description of the cooperative approach (para. 18(i))
					1.	Description of how the cooperative approach minimizes and, where possible, avoids negative environmental, economic and social impacts (para. 18(i)(i), to be updated by para. 22(f))
					2.	Description of how the cooperative approach reflects the eleventh preambular paragraph of the Paris Agreement, according to which acknowledging that climate change is a common concern of humankind, Parties should, when taking action to address climate change, respect, promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights, the right to health, the rights of indigenous peoples, local communities, migrants, children, persons with disabilities and people in vulnerable situations and the right to development, as well as gender equality, empowerment of women and intergenerational equity (para. 18(i)(ii), to be updated by para. 22(g))
					3.	Description of how the cooperative approach is consistent with the sustainable development objectives of the Party, noting national prerogatives (para. 18(i)(iii), to be updated by para. 22(h))
					4.	Description of how the cooperative approach applies any safeguards and limits set out in further guidance from the CMA pursuant to chapter III.D (para. 18(i)(iv), to be updated by para. 22(i))
					5.	Description of how the cooperative approach contributes resources for adaptation pursuant to chapter VII (Ambition in mitigation and adaptation actions), if applicable (para. 18(i)(v), to be updated by para. 22(j))
					6.	Description of how the cooperative approach delivers overall mitigation in global emissions pursuant to chapter VII (Ambition in mitigation and adaptation actions), if applicable (para. 18(i)(vi), to be updated by para. 22(k))
			
Annex VI*
	Outline of annex 4 (Information in relation to the Party’s participation in cooperative approaches, as applicable) to the biennial transparency report referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV.C (Regular information), paragraphs 21–22
		[English only]
		I.	Participation responsibilities (para. 21(a))
			A.	Information on how the Party ensures that it is a Party to the Paris Agreement (para. 21(a), para. 4(a), update to para. 18(a))
			B.	Information on how the Party ensures that it has prepared, communicated and is maintaining an NDC in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 2 (para. 21(a), para. 4(b), update to para. 18(a))
			C.	Information on how the Party ensures it has arrangements in place for authorizing the use of ITMOs towards achievement of NDCs pursuant to Article 6, paragraph 3 (para. 21(a), para. 4(c), update to para. 18(a))
			D.	Information on how the Party ensures it has arrangements in place that are consistent with the Article 6, paragraph 2, guidance and relevant decisions of the CMA for tracking ITMOs (para. 21(a), para. 4(d), update to para. 18(a))
			E.	Information on whether the most recent national inventory report required in accordance with decision 18/CMA.1 has been provided (para. 21(a), para. 4(e), update to para. 18(a))
			F.	Information on how the Party ensures participation contributes to the implementation of its NDC and long-term low-emission development strategy, if it has submitted one, and the long-term goals of the Paris Agreement (para. 21(a), para. 4(f), update to para. 18(a))
		II.	Updates to the information provided by the Party in its initial report as per decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV.A (Initial report), and any previous biennial transparency reports for any information that is not included in the biennial transparency report pursuant to decision 18/CMA.1, annex, paragraph 64 (para. 21(b), update to para. 18(b))
		III.	Information on authorizations and information on its authorization(s) of use of ITMOs towards achievement of NDCs and authorization for use for other international mitigation purposes, including any changes to earlier authorizations, pursuant to Article 6, paragraph 3 (para. 21(c))
		IV.	Information on how corresponding adjustments undertaken in the latest reporting period, pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter III (Corresponding adjustments) ensure that double counting is avoided in accordance with paragraph 36 of decision 1/CP.21 and are representative of progress towards implementation and achievement of the Party’s NDC, and how those corresponding adjustments ensure that participation in cooperative approaches does not lead to a net increase in emissions across participating Parties within and between NDC implementation periods (para. 21(d))
		V.	Information on how the Party has ensured that ITMOs that have been used towards achievement of its NDC or mitigation outcome(s) authorized for use and that have been used for other international mitigation purposes will not be further transferred, further cancelled or otherwise used (para. 21(e))
		VI.	Information on each cooperative approach (para. 22(a–k))
			Note: Chapters A–K below should be repeated for each cooperative approach.
				A.	Description of how the cooperative approach contributes to the mitigation of GHGs and the implementation of the NDC (para. 22(a))
				B.	Description of how the cooperative approach ensures environmental integrity (para. 22(b), update to para. 18(h))
					1.	Description of how the cooperative approach ensures that there is no net increase in global emissions within and between NDC implementation periods (para. 22(b)(i), update to para. 18(h)(i))
					2.	Description of how the cooperative approach ensures environmental integrity through robust, transparent governance and the quality of mitigation outcomes, including through conservative reference levels and baselines set in a conservative way and below ‘business as usual’ emission projections (including by taking into account all existing policies and addressing uncertainties in quantification and potential leakage) (para. 22(b)(ii), update to para. 18(h)(ii))
					3.	Description of how the cooperative approach is minimizing the risk of non-permanence of mitigation across several NDC periods and how, when reversals of emission reductions or removals occur, the cooperative approach will ensure that these are addressed in full (para. 22(b)(iii), update to para. 18(h)(iii))
				C.	Where a mitigation outcome is measured and transferred in t CO2 eq, description of how the cooperative approach provides for the measurement of mitigation outcomes in accordance with the methodologies and metrics assessed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and adopted by the CMA (para. 22(c))
				D.	Where a mitigation outcome is measured and first transferred in a non-GHG metric determined by the participating Parties, description of how the cooperative approach ensures that the method for converting the non-GHG metric into t CO2 eq is appropriate for the specific non-GHG metric and the mitigation scenario in which it is applied, including: (para. 22(d))
					1.	Description of how the conversion method represents the emission reductions or removals that occur within the geographical boundaries and time frame in which the non‑GHG mitigation outcome was generated (para. 22(d)(i))
					2.	Description of how the conversion method is appropriate for the specific non‑CO2 eq metric, including a demonstration of how the selection of the conversion method and conversion factor(s) applied take into consideration the specific scenario in which the mitigation action occurs (para. 22(d)(ii))
					3.	Description of how the conversion method is transparent, including a description of the method, the source of the underlying data, how the data are used, and how the method is applied in a conservative manner that addresses uncertainty and ensures environmental integrity (para. 22(d)(iii))
				E.	Description of how the cooperative approach provides for, as applicable, the measurement of mitigation co-benefits resulting from adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans (para. 22(e))
				F.	Description of how the cooperative approach minimizes and, where possible, avoids negative environmental, economic and social impacts (para. 22(f), update to para. 18(i)(i))
				G.	Description of how the cooperative approach reflects the eleventh preambular paragraph of the Paris Agreement, according to which acknowledging that climate change is a common concern of humankind, Parties should, when taking action to address climate change, respect, promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights, the right to health, the rights of indigenous peoples, local communities, migrants, children, persons with disabilities and people in vulnerable situations and the right to development, as well as gender equality, empowerment of women and intergenerational equity (para. 22(g), update to para. 18(i)(ii))
				H.	Description of how the cooperative approach is consistent with sustainable development objectives of the Party, noting national prerogatives (para. 22(h), update to para. 18(i)(iii))
				I.	Description of how the cooperative approach applies any safeguards and limits set out in further guidance from the CMA pursuant to chapter III.D (para. 22(i), update to para. 18(i)(iv))
				J.	Description of how the cooperative approach contributes resources for adaptation pursuant to chapter VII (Ambition in mitigation and adaptation actions), if applicable (para. 22(j), update to para. 18(i)(v))
				K.	Description of how the cooperative approach delivers overall mitigation in global emissions pursuant to chapter VII (Ambition in mitigation and adaptation actions), if applicable (para. 22(k), update to para. 18(i)(vi))
			Annex I on additional information
			Annex II for confidential information
				1.	
Annex VII*
	Draft version of the agreed electronic format referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, chapter IV.B (Annual information)
		[English only]
		Draft version of the agreed electronic format is available digitally at https://unfccc.int/documents/624366.
		{Required fields are in bold}
		Table 1: Heading
			| Party | Party |
			| Reported year | Year |
			
				a  The annual period from 1 January to 31 December during 
which actions occurred.
				1.	
				
			| Table 2: Actions |  |  |  |
			| Article 6 database record ID | Cooperative approacha | ITMO |
			|  |  | Unique identifier |  | Metric and quantity |  | ITMO details |
			|  |  | First unique identifierb | Last unique identifierc | Underlying unit block start IDd | Underlying unit block ende |  | Metricf | Quantity
(expressed in metric)g | Quantity (t CO2 eq) | Conversion factor (reporting Party)h |  | First transferring participating Partyi | Vintagej | Sector(s)k | Activity type(s)l |
			|  | Cooperative approach Article 6.4 mechanism |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Energy IPPU AFOLU Waste |  |
			
			
			(Table continues)
			|  | Authorization |  |  | First transfer definitionp |  | Actions |
			| Date of authorizationm | Authorization IDn | Purposes for authorization | OIMP authorized by the Partyo |  |  | Action details |  |
			|  |  |  |  |  |  | Action dateq | Action typer | Transferring participating Partys | Acquiring participating Partyt | Purposes for cancellationu | Using participating Party or authorized entity or entities | First transferv |
			|  |  | NDC OIMP NDC and OIMP |  | Authorization Issuance Use or cancellation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
			
				a Name/ID of the cooperative approach as per common nomenclatures, which are to be established at CMA 5 (November–December 2023).
				b First ITMO unique identifier.
				c Last ITMO unique identifier.
				d Underlying unit block start ID for ITMOs recorded on the basis of cooperative approach units tracked in an underlying cooperative approach registry.
				e Underlying unit block end ID for ITMOs recorded on the basis of cooperative approach units tracked in an underlying cooperative approach registry.
				f GHG or non-GHG.
				g For non-GHG, the metric in which the ITMO was generated as per common nomenclatures.
				h The conversion method or factor of the non-GHG units in the reporting Party’s as per decision 2/CMA.3, annex, para. 22(d).
				i Participating Party in which the mitigation outcome was generated as per common nomenclatures.
				j Year in which the mitigation outcome occurred.
				k Sector(s) where the mitigation outcome occurred as per common nomenclatures based on IPCC guidelines.
				l Description of the mitigation activity type(s) as per common nomenclatures.
				m Date of authorization by first transferring Party.
				n Authorization ID as assigned by the first transferring Party, may include a link to the public evidence of authorization by the first transferring Party.
				o To be completed when “Purposes for authorization” is “OIMP” or “NDC and OIMP”.
				p If OIMP is authorized, the first transferring participating Party definition of “first transfer” as per decision 2/CMA.3, annex, para. 2(b).
				q Date on which the action was executed in the registry of the reporting Party.
				r Action type as per decision 2/CMA.3, annex, para. 20(a), and any further relevant guidance.
				s Initiating participating Party, including for cancellations and uses.
				t Participating Party receiving the ITMOs.
				u For relevant actions, the specific purposes for cancellation towards which ITMOs can be or were used.
				v Approach for first transfer as per decision 2/CMA.3, annex, para. 2, to be clarified, subject to defining the list of actions as per note “r” above.
		
			| Table 3: Holdings |  |  |  |
			| Article 6 database record ID | Cooperative approacha | ITMO |
			|  |  | Unique identifier |  | Metric and quantity |  | ITMO details |
			|  |  | First unique identifierb | Last unique identifierc | Underlying unit block start IDd | Underlying unit block ende |  | Metricf | Quantity
(expressed in metric)g | Quantity (t CO2 eq) | Conversion factor (reporting Party)h |  | First transferring participating Partyi | Vintagej | Sector(s)k | Activity type(s)l |
			|  | Cooperative approach Article 6.4 mechanism |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Energy IPPU AFOLU Waste |  |
			
			
			(Table continues)
			|  | Authorization |  |  | First transfer definitionp |
			| Date of authorizationm | Authorization IDn | Purposes for authorization | OIMP authorized by the Partyo |  |
			|  |  | NDC OIMP NDC and OIMP |  | Authorization Issuance Use or cancellation |
			
				a Name/unique identifier of the cooperative approach as per common nomenclatures, which are to be established at CMA 5 (November–December 2023).
				b First ITMO unique identifier.
				c Last ITMO unique identifier.
				d Underlying unit block start ID for ITMOs recorded on the basis of cooperative approach units tracked in an underlying cooperative approach registry.
				e Underlying unit block end ID for ITMOs recorded on the basis of cooperative approach units tracked in an underlying cooperative approach registry.
				f GHG or non-GHG.
				g For non-GHG, the metric in which the ITMO was generated as per common nomenclatures.
				h The conversion method or factor of the non-GHG units in the reporting Party’s as per decision 2/CMA.3, annex, para. 22(d).
				i Participating Party in which the mitigation outcome was generated as per common nomenclatures.
				j Year in which the mitigation outcome occurred.
				k Sector(s) where the mitigation outcome occurred as per common nomenclatures based on IPCC guidelines.
				l Description of the mitigation activity type(s) as per common nomenclatures.
				m Date of authorization by first transferring Party.
				n Authorization ID as assigned by the first transferring Party, may include a link to the public evidence of authorization by the first transferring Party.
				o To be completed when “Purposes for authorization” is “OIMP” or “NDC and OIMP”.
				p If OIMP is authorized, the first transferring participating Party definition of “first transfer” as per decision 2/CMA.3, annex, para. 2(b).
				
					(a)	
Abbreviations and acronyms
	| AFOLU | agriculture, forestry and other land use |
	| Article 6.4 mechanism | mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement |
	| CMA | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement |
	| CO2 | carbon dioxide |
	| CO2 eq | carbon dioxide equivalent |
	| GHG | greenhouse gas |
	| IPCC | Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change |
	| IPPU | industrial processes and product use |
	| ITMO | internationally transferred mitigation outcome |
	| NDC | nationally determined contribution |
	| OIMP* | other international mitigation purpose |
	
		10th plenary meeting
		20 November 2022
		
	Decision 7/CMA.4
	Guidance on the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement and the aims referred to therein,
		Also recalling Article 6, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement,
		Further recalling the eleventh preambular paragraph of the Paris Agreement, according to which acknowledging that climate change is a common concern of humankind, Parties should, when taking action to address climate change, respect, promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights, the right to health, the rights of indigenous peoples, local communities, migrants, children, persons with disabilities and people in vulnerable situations and the right to development, as well as gender equality, empowerment of women and intergenerational equity,
		Recalling decision 3/CMA.3 and its annex, containing the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement,
		Also recalling that, pursuant to decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 1(g), Article 6, paragraph 4, emission reductions, when they are authorized for use towards achievement of nationally determined contributions and/or authorized for use for other international mitigation purposes, are internationally transferred mitigation outcomes and relevant guidance under Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement applies,
			1.	Decides to elaborate the processes referred to in decision 3/CMA.3, paragraph 7(b–‍g), on the basis of the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement, contained in annex I;
			2.	Welcomes the designation of national authorities for the mechanism by 28 Parties as at 18 November 2022;
			3.	Reminds Parties wishing to participate in the mechanism to designate a national authority for the mechanism and communicate that designation to the secretariat;
			4.	Notes that the Supervisory Body for the mechanism held its 1st meeting in July 2022 after the final nominations to the Supervisory Body had been received in June 2022 and held three meetings in total in 2022;
			5.	Welcomes the annual report for 2022 of the Supervisory Body to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and its addendum;
			6.	Commends the work undertaken by the Supervisory Body since its inception to address the mandates given by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its third session;
			7.	Adopts the rules of procedure of the Supervisory Body, contained in annex II;
			8.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice to continue its consideration of, and to develop, on the basis of the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism contained in the annex to decision 3/CMA.3, recommendations, for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its sixth session (November 2024), on further responsibilities of the Supervisory Body and of Parties that host Article 6, paragraph 4, activities in order for such host Parties to elaborate on and apply national arrangements for the mechanism under the approval and supervision of the Supervisory Body;
			9.	Also requests the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice to continue its consideration of, and to develop, on the basis of the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism and elaboration thereon, recommendations for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its fifth session (November–December 2023) on:
				(a)	Consideration of whether Article 6, paragraph 4, activities could include emission avoidance and conservation enhancement activities;
				(b)	Connection of the mechanism registry to the international registry as per paragraph 63 of the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism, as well as to other registries referred to in decision 2/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 29, if applicable, including the nature and extent of interoperable features;
				(c)	Provision of a statement by the host Party to the Supervisory Body specifying whether it authorizes Article 6, paragraph 4, emission reductions issued for an Article 6, paragraph 4, activity for use towards achievement of nationally determined contributions and/or for other international mitigation purposes, as defined in decision 2/CMA.3, in accordance with paragraph 42 of the rules, modalities and procedures, including its timing, relevant information on the authorization and any revisions;
			10.	Invites Parties and admitted observer organizations to submit, via the submission portal, by 15 March 2023, their views on the matters referred to in paragraph 9 above, and requests the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on the submissions for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice at its fifty-eighth session (June 2023);
			11.	Also requests the secretariat to organize a technical expert dialogue, to be held between the fifty-eighth and fifty-ninth (November–December 2023) sessions of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice, to consider the matters referred to in paragraph 9 above, taking into account the submissions and the synthesis report referred to in paragraph 10 above, ensuring broad participation of Parties;
			12.	Further requests the secretariat to expedite the implementation of the capacity-building programme referred to in decision 3/CMA.3, paragraph 14, within a time frame in which elements are prioritized that are more urgent and relevant to enabling Parties to participate in the mechanism, taking into account the work it has already initiated under the capacity-building programme, and to report regularly on the status of its implementation to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
			13.	Notes that the levels of share of proceeds for administrative expenses contained in annex I, chapter V, are to be reviewed periodically for the sound operation of the Supervisory Body and for enabling a periodic contribution of funds to the Adaptation Fund;
			14.	Also notes that the Supervisory Body will determine a specific level for each fee type, within the maximum level therein, when developing procedures for processing requests in the activity cycle under the mechanism, with the intention to set the fee levels low where appropriate;
			15.	Further notes that, for the monetary contributions from individual Article 6, paragraph 4, activities to the Adaptation Fund in accordance with the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism, the Supervisory Body agreed to deduct 3 per cent of the issuance fee paid for each request for issuance of Article 6, paragraph 4, emission reductions and collectively transfer it annually to the Adaptation Fund;
			16.	Notes that the level of and process for monetary contributions from individual Article 6, paragraph 4, activities to the Adaptation Fund may be modified by the Supervisory Body in future on the basis of its review of the implementation of the provision thereon;
			17.	Decides that the level and frequency of a periodic contribution from the remaining funds received from the share of proceeds for administrative expenses to the Adaptation Fund shall be determined by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement on the basis of annual reviews of the status of those funds;
			18.	Acknowledges the work undertaken by the Supervisory Body based on the request from the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement in decision 3/CMA.3, paragraph 6(c–d);
			19.	Invites Parties and admitted observer organizations to submit, via the submission portal, by 15 March 2023, their views on activities involving removals, including appropriate monitoring, reporting, accounting for removals and crediting periods, addressing reversals, avoidance of leakage, and avoidance of other negative environmental and social impacts, in addition to the activities referred to in chapter V of the rules, modalities and procedures;
			20.	Requests the Supervisory Body to consider the views of Parties and observers in elaborating and further developing recommendations on activities involving removals, as referred to in paragraph 19 above, on the basis of the rules, modalities and procedures, and taking into account the mandate provided to the Supervisory Body contained in paragraph 24(a)(ix) of the rules, modalities and procedures, for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its fifth session;
			21.	Also requests the Supervisory Body to elaborate and further develop recommendations, on the basis of the rules, modalities and procedures, for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its fifth session, on the application of the requirements referred to in chapter V.B (Methodologies) of the rules, modalities and procedures;
			22.	Further requests the Supervisory Body, while developing the recommendations referred to in paragraphs 20–21 above, to consider broader inputs from stakeholders provided in a structured public consultation process;
			23.	Requests the Supervisory Body to facilitate the tasks related to the transition of clean development mechanism activities to the mechanism by:
				(a)	Developing and operationalizing a procedure for requesting transition, which includes relevant forms, by no later than June 2023;
				(b)	Developing and operationalizing the transition process and reporting back to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its fifth session;
			24.	Expresses its appreciation for the transfer of funds from the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities for the work of the Supervisory Body carried out in accordance with decision 2/CMP.16, paragraphs 18‒19;
			25.	Takes note of the agreed resource allocation plan of the Supervisory Body for 2023, which provides an estimated budget for its work, as outlined in its workplan for 2023, and other activities deemed essential for operationalizing the mechanism;
			26.	Requests the Supervisory Body to reinforce its support structure and allocate dedicated resources to support the work of the Supervisory Body;
			27.	Also requests the secretariat to take necessary steps to establish a separate trust fund for the receipt of the shares of proceeds to cover administrative expenses charged as fees under the mechanism and other contributions;
			28.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in this decision;
			29.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		
	Annex I
	Elaboration of the processes defined in the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement
		I.	Processes for implementing the transition of activities from the clean development mechanism to the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement
			A.	Crediting period
				1.	Pursuant to paragraph 73 of the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement (RMPs), registered project activities under the clean development mechanism (CDM) may transition to the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement (Article 6.4 mechanism) subject to the conditions referred to in paragraph 73 of the RMPs, including the requirements regarding the activity design elaborated in chapter I.B below, and if their crediting periods would have been active as of 1 January 2021 had the crediting under the CDM continued after the end of the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol.
				2.	The crediting period type (i.e. renewable or fixed) and the remaining number of renewals of the crediting period, if it is renewable, of CDM project activities that transition to the Article 6.4 mechanism shall not change at the time of or after the transition.
				3.	The current crediting period of CDM project activities that transition to the Article 6.4 mechanism shall end, whichever is earlier:
					(a)	When the current crediting period would have ended had the crediting period under the CDM continued after the end of the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol;
					(b)	On 31 December 2025, if the crediting period is renewable;
					(c)	On the date determined under the conditions of the crediting period that may be specified by the respective host Parties in accordance with paragraph 27(b) of the RMPs.
					4.	For CDM project activities with a renewable crediting period, once renewed under the Article 6.4 mechanism, the length of each of the remaining crediting periods of the transitioned project activities shall be consistent with the relevant rules under the Article 6.4 mechanism.
					5.	The principles referred to in paragraphs 1–4 above shall also apply to the CDM programmes of activities (PoAs) and the component project activities (CPAs) therein that transition to the Article 6.4 mechanism in terms of the PoA period and the crediting period of CPAs respectively.
			B.	Activity design
				6.	The activity types of registered CDM project activities and PoAs and the CPAs therein, as well as those in the requests for registration, renewal and issuance listed as provisional (provisional requests) under the temporary measures adopted by the Executive Board of the CDM at its 108th meeting (temporary measures), that transition to the Article 6.4 mechanism (transitioning activities) shall be among those indicated by their respective host Parties in accordance with paragraph 26(e) of the RMPs.
				7.	Pursuant to paragraph 73(c) of the RMPs, transitioning activities shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of the RMPs in accordance with guidance to be provided by the Supervisory Body.
				8.	The CDM methodologies applied to transitioning activities shall meet the methodological requirements that may be specified by the respective host Parties in accordance with paragraph 27(a) of the RMPs, taking into account the condition referred to in paragraph 73(d) of the RMPs. If the CDM methodologies do not meet these requirements, they shall be replaced accordingly.
					9.	In the absence of an applicable mechanism methodology, transitioning activities with a crediting period ending before 31 December 2025 may apply interim solutions to be provided by the Supervisory Body with regard to the provision in paragraph 73(d) of the RMPs.
					10.	Transitioning activities shall apply the same global warming potential values as applicable to any activities under Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement (Article 6.4 activities) in accordance with relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA).
			C.	Transition process
				11.	Pursuant to paragraph 73(a) of the RMPs, the project participants of a registered CDM project activity or the coordinating/managing entity of a registered CDM PoA that are approved by the CDM host Party, or an entity acting on their behalf, that wish to transition the activity to the Article 6.4 mechanism shall submit a request for such transition to the secretariat and to the designated national authority (DNA) for the Article 6.4 mechanism of the CDM host Party, as designated in accordance with paragraph 26(c) of the RMPs, informing the DNA for the CDM of the same Party by no later than 31 December 2023 in accordance with the procedure to be developed by the Supervisory Body.
				12.	Pursuant to paragraph 73(b) of the RMPs, the DNA for the Article 6.4 mechanism of a CDM host Party, if it approves the transition, shall provide the approval to the Supervisory Body by no later than 31 December 2025 in accordance with the procedure to be developed by the Supervisory Body.
				13.	Requests for transition and host Party approvals of provisional requests under the temporary measures and other participating Party approvals of activity participants shall be submitted in accordance with paragraphs 11‒12 above, as applicable. Requests for transition of provisional requests for renewal and issuance under the temporary measures shall be processed only after the respective underlying CDM activities have successfully transitioned to the Article 6.4 mechanism.
				14.	Requests for transition of CDM activities and provisional requests under the temporary measures submitted to the secretariat shall be subject to the share of proceeds to cover administrative expenses and/or the share of proceeds to assist developing country Parties that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change to meet the costs of adaptation applicable under the Article 6.4 mechanism in the following manner:
					(a)	Requests for transition of CDM activities are subject to the share of proceeds applicable to requests for registration under the Article 6.4 mechanism;
					(b)	Provisional requests for registration under the temporary measures are subject to the share of proceeds applicable to requests for registration under the Article 6.4 mechanism;
					(c)	Provisional inclusion of CPAs under the temporary measures are subject to the share of proceeds applicable to inclusion of CPAs in a registered PoA under the Article 6.4 mechanism;
					(d)	Provisional requests for renewal under the temporary measures are subject to the share of proceeds applicable to requests for renewal under the Article 6.4 mechanism;
					(e)	Provisional requests for issuance under the temporary measures are subject to the share of proceeds applicable to requests for issuance under the Article 6.4 mechanism.
					15.	For requests for transition of CDM activities and provisional requests under the temporary measures that are approved by the Supervisory Body, the effective date of transition may be deemed as 1 January 2021 at the earliest, irrespective of the date of approval of the requests by the Supervisory Body.
				16.	Once the transition is approved by the Supervisory Body, the activities and requests are subject to all relevant requirements under the Article 6.4 mechanism at all subsequent steps in the mechanism’s activity cycle, taking into account the provisions on the applied methodologies contained in paragraphs 27(a) and 73(d) of the RMPs, as described in paragraphs 8‒9 above.
				17.	The Supervisory Body shall effect the transition of CDM activities, noting that such CDM activities are deregistered from the CDM automatically from the date of transition pursuant to decision 2/CMP.16, paragraph 12.
		II.	Processes for implementing chapter XI.B (Use of certified emission reductions towards first or first updated nationally determined contributions) of the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement
			A.	Transfer of certified emission reductions from the clean development mechanism registry
				18.	The transfer of certified emission reductions (CERs) to the mechanism registry referred to in chapter VI of the RMPs that are eligible for such transfer as per paragraph 75 of the RMPs (eligible CERs), when the transfer is initiated by the project participants or the Parties holding eligible CERs in the CDM registry or the Trustee of the Adaptation Fund in accordance with the modalities contained in decision 2/CMP.17, shall be communicated by the CDM Registry Administrator to the mechanism registry administrator in accordance with the modalities contained in that decision and any other relevant guidance of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol. The transfer data shall include the full serial numbers of the eligible CERs and the identification of the receiving account. All transfer data shall be subject to a reconciliation process to be developed and implemented by the registry administrators of the two registries (the secretariat).
				19.	The mechanism registry administrator shall check the transfer data received from the CDM registry and shall record transferred eligible CERs in the receiving accounts as communicated by the CDM Registry Administrator. The mechanism registry shall assign unique identifiers to received CERs, as per the applicable rules for serialization of units in the mechanism registry to be developed by the Supervisory Body, and shall track, display and report on CERs as related to pre-2021 emission reductions pursuant to paragraph 75(b) of the RMPs. The mechanism registry shall also track the original Kyoto Protocol serial numbers of the received CERs.
				20.	The mechanism registry may continue to receive transfers of CERs from the CDM registry until a date to be determined by the CMA.
				21.	Transactions of CERs shall adhere to the modalities in accordance with chapter IV below (Operation of the mechanism registry).
			B.	Use of certified emission reductions towards achievement of nationally determined contributions
				22.	Parties may use CERs transferred to the mechanism registry towards achievement of their first or first updated nationally determined contributions (NDCs) by retiring the CERs in accordance with the modalities to be adopted by the CMA and/or the relevant requirements and procedures to be adopted by the Supervisory Body.
				23.	For use of CERs towards achievement of their first or first updated NDCs, using Parties shall apply the guidance on the use of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes towards the achievement of NDCs mutatis mutandis by subtracting the quantity of CERs retired in the mechanism registry in the calculation of the emissions balance in accordance with paragraphs 7‒8 of the annex to decision 2/CMA.3, noting that the host Party shall not be required to apply a corresponding adjustment as per paragraph 75(d) of the RMPs.
				24.	Parties that use CERs towards achievement of their first or first updated NDCs shall:
					(a)	Report for each year of the NDC implementation period the amounts of CERs used for that purpose in the row “Any other information consistent with decisions adopted by the CMA on reporting under Article 6 (para. 77(d)(iii) of the MPGs)” of table 4 in annex II to decision 5/CMA.3;
						(b)	Include the relevant subtractions, determined in accordance with paragraph 23 above, in the row “Total quantitative corresponding adjustments used to calculate the emissions balance referred to in para. 23(k)(i), annex to decision 2/CMA.3, in accordance with the Party’s method for applying corresponding adjustments consistent with section III.B, annex to decision 2/CMA.3 (Application of corresponding adjustments) (para. 23(g), annex to decision 2/CMA.3)” of table 4 in annex II to decision 5/CMA.3.
		III.	Reporting by host Parties on their Article 6, paragraph 4, activities and the Article 6, paragraph 4, emission reductions issued for those activities
			25.	Host Parties shall provide to the Supervisory Body the information referred to in paragraphs 26‒28 of the RMPs relating to the participation responsibilities of host Parties in accordance with the modalities to be specified by the Supervisory Body. The Supervisory Body shall promptly make the received information publicly available on the UNFCCC website. In this context:
				(a)	The information on the status as a Party under the Paris Agreement referred to in paragraph 26(a) of the RMPs is deemed to have been provided if the instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession have been deposited with the Depositary in accordance with Article 20 of the Paris Agreement;
				(b)	The information on the preparation, communication and maintenance of NDCs referred to in paragraphs 26(b) and 28(a) of the RMPs is deemed to have been provided if it has been communicated to the secretariat in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement and is still valid.
			26.	Pursuant to paragraphs 40, 41 and 45 of the RMPs, host Parties and other participating Parties shall provide to the Supervisory Body the information referred to in these paragraphs relating to the approval of specific activities by a host Party, authorization of specific activity participants by a host Party and authorization of activity participants by another participating Party respectively, in accordance with the modalities to be specified by the Supervisory Body.
		IV.	Operation of the mechanism registry
			A.	Form and functions
				27.	Pursuant to paragraphs 64–65 of the RMPs, the mechanism registry shall:
					(a)	Take the form of a standardized electronic database and shall track Article 6, paragraph 4, emission reductions (A6.4ERs) and CERs transferred to the mechanism registry pursuant to paragraph 75 of the RMPs;
					(b)	Be consistent with the requirements for registries contained in the guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement and further relevant decisions of the CMA;
					(c)	Be hosted and maintained by the secretariat.
				28.	The mechanism registry shall track A6.4ERs and CERs transferred to the mechanism registry pursuant to paragraph 75 of the RMPs as units. Each unit shall be indivisible and transactions in the mechanism registry may only involve full units.
					29.	The mechanism registry shall track:
						(a)	A6.4ERs authorized for use towards achievement of NDCs and/or for other international mitigation purposes pursuant to paragraph 42 of the RMPs (authorized A6.4ERs);
							(b)	A6.4ERs not specified as authorized for use towards achievement of NDCs and/or for other international mitigation purposes (mitigation contribution A6.4ERs), which may be used, inter alia, for results-based climate finance, domestic mitigation pricing schemes or domestic price-based measures, for the purpose of contributing to the reduction of emission levels in the host Party.
					30.	Each A6.4ER or CER tracked in the mechanism registry shall have a unique identifier assigned in accordance with the modalities to be developed by the Supervisory Body and consistently with the guidance adopted by the CMA for registries under cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement.
				31.	Each A6.4ER or CER shall be held in only one account in the mechanism registry at a time.
				32.	Pursuant to paragraph 63 of the RMPs, the mechanism registry shall have at a minimum the following account types, to be opened in accordance with the requirements and procedures to be adopted by the Supervisory Body:
					(a)	Pending account, to which all A6.4ERs shall be issued;
					(b)	Holding account, which may acquire A6.4ERs or CERs tracked in the mechanism registry;
					(c)	Share of proceeds for adaptation account, which receives A6.4ERs in accordance with paragraph 58 of the RMPs;
					(d)	Account for mandatory cancellation of A6.4ERs for overall mitigation in global emissions (OMGE) in accordance with paragraph 59 of the RMPs (mandatory cancellation for OMGE account);
					(e)	Account for voluntary cancellation of A6.4ERs for OMGE in accordance with paragraph 70 of the RMPs (voluntary cancellation for OMGE account);
					(f)	Retirement account for A6.4ERs and CERs;
						(g)	Account for cancellation of A6.4ERs for other international mitigation purposes;
					(h)	Account for voluntary cancellation of A6.4ERs for other purposes;
						(i)	Account for administrative cancellation of A6.4ERs and CERs tracked in the mechanism registry for corrective actions and other purposes, as necessary.
					33.	Pursuant to paragraph 63 of the RMPs, Parties and entities authorized by a participating Party as activity participants may request to open holding accounts in the mechanism registry in accordance with the requirements and procedures to be adopted by the Supervisory Body. The opening of such an account shall be approved by the participating Party that authorized participation. Such holding accounts shall be associated with the Party that authorized participation.
					34.	Pursuant to paragraph 55 of the RMPs, the mechanism registry shall allow account holders to see the authorization status and the first transfer status of A6.4ERs held in their holding accounts. The mechanism registry shall also allow account holders to see if a transaction is the first transfer in the transaction history of their accounts.
			B.	Transaction procedure
				35.	The mechanism registry shall perform issuance, forwarding, first transfer, transfer, cancellation, voluntary cancellation and retirement of A6.4ERs or, where applicable, of CERs transferred to the mechanism registry in accordance with paragraph 75 of the RMPs.
				36.	A transaction that meets the definition of first transfer pursuant to paragraph 2 of the annex to decision 2/CMA.3 and relevant decisions of the CMA shall be distinguished as a first transfer in the mechanism registry.
				37.	Pursuant to paragraph 54 of the RMPs, upon being instructed by the Supervisory Body, the mechanism registry administrator shall issue all authorized A6.4ERs and mitigation contribution A6.4ERs into the pending account.
				38.	Pursuant to paragraph 55 of the RMPs, the mechanism registry administrator shall, at the time of the issuance of A6.4ERs, assign their authorization status in accordance with the statement by the host Party provided to the Supervisory Body pursuant to paragraph 42 of the RMPs.
				39.	Pursuant to paragraph 58 of the RMPs, the mechanism registry administrator shall forward 5 per cent of issued authorized A6.4ERs and mitigation contribution A6.4ERs in the pending account immediately to the share of proceeds for adaptation account held by the Adaptation Fund and, if the issued A6.4ERs are authorized, shall distinguish the forwarding as effecting a first transfer. This first transfer shall be subject to a corresponding adjustment.
				40.	Pursuant to paragraphs 59 and 69 of the RMPs, the mechanism registry administrator shall cancel a minimum of 2 per cent of issued authorized A6.4ERs and mitigation contribution A6.4ERs in the pending account immediately up to the mandatory cancellation for OMGE account, and if the issued A6.4ERs are authorized, shall distinguish the cancellation as a first transfer. This first transfer shall be subject to a corresponding adjustment.
				41.	Pursuant to paragraph 60 of the RMPs, the mechanism registry administrator shall forward or effect a first transfer of, as applicable, the remaining A6.4ERs to the holding accounts of activity participants and participating Parties involved, in accordance with the instructions of the activity participants.
				42.	Account holders may request transfer, cancellation or voluntary cancellation of A6.4ERs or CERs held in their holding accounts in accordance with relevant requirements and procedures to be adopted by the Supervisory Body.
				43.	Account holders may acquire A6.4ERs or CERs in the mechanism registry in their holding accounts in accordance with relevant requirements and procedures to be adopted by the Supervisory Body.
				44.	Each participating Party may request to open a retirement account, as needed. A retirement account may acquire A6.4ERs authorized for use towards achievement of NDCs or CERs in the mechanism registry only from accounts associated with the participating Party for which the retirement account was opened.
				45.	A6.4ERs or CERs transferred to any cancellation account or retirement account shall not be further transferred.
			C.	Information
				46.	The mechanism registry shall enable, for each participating Party, the automatic prefilling of the agreed electronic format and of other quantitative information requirements pursuant to chapter IV (Reporting) of the annex to decision 2/CMA.3 in relation to authorized A6.4ERs and the creation of records of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes in the accounts of the international registry so as to enable tracking pursuant to chapter VI.A (Tracking) of the annex to decision 2/CMA.3.
				47.	The mechanism registry shall enable the production and dissemination of reports to the DNAs of Parties participating in the Article 6.4 mechanism on the holdings and transaction history in relation to accounts and transactions associated with the respective Party.
				48.	The mechanism registry shall make non-confidential information publicly available and provide a publicly accessible interface through the Internet.
			D.	Connection with the international registry
				49.	Pursuant to paragraph 63 of the RMPs, the mechanism registry shall be connected to the international registry. The connection shall allow for automated pulling and viewing of data and information on holdings and the action history of authorized A6.4ERs for use by participating Parties that have an account in the international registry.
		V.	Processes necessary for implementing the share of proceeds to cover administrative expenses and the share of proceeds to assist developing country Parties that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change to meet the costs of adaptation
			A.	Share of proceeds for administrative expenses
				50.	The share of proceeds to cover administrative expenses shall comprise:
					(a)	A fee charged for a request for registration of an Article 6.4 activity (the registration fee);
						(b)	A fee charged for inclusion of CPAs in a registered PoA (the inclusion fee);
						(c)	A fee charged for a request for issuance of A6.4ERs for a registered Article 6.4 activity (the issuance fee);
					(d)	A fee charged for a request for renewal of crediting period or PoA period for a registered project activity under Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement and PoA, respectively, and for renewal of CPAs included in a registered PoA (the renewal fee);
						(e)	A fee charged for a request for approval of a post-registration change for a registered Article 6.4 activity (the post-registration change fee).
				51.	The registration fee shall be multi-tiered fixed rates for stand-alone activities, tiered by the estimated annual average emission reductions or removals over the first crediting period, if it is renewable, or over the entire crediting period, if it is fixed, and a fixed rate for PoAs set at the following levels, and shall be deemed to be fully consumed for processing the request and not deemed an advance payment of the issuance fee referred to in paragraph 53 below:
					(a)	A maximum of USD 2,000 for an activity achieving annual average emission reductions or removals over the (first) crediting period of up to 15,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq);
					(b)	A maximum of USD 6,000 for an activity achieving annual average emission reductions or removals over the (first) crediting period of between 15,001 and 50,000 t CO2 eq;
					(c)	A maximum of USD 12,000 for an activity achieving annual average emission reductions or removals over the (first) crediting period of over 50,000 t CO2 eq or for a PoA.
				52.	The inclusion fee shall be a maximum of USD 1,000 per inclusion.
				53.	The issuance fee shall be a proportional levy to the amount of A6.4ERs requested for issuance, set at a maximum of USD 0.20 per A6.4ER requested for issuance.
				54.	The renewal fee shall be at the same level as the registration fee applicable to the activity based on its scale of emission reductions or removals or inclusion fee, as applicable.
				55.	The post-registration change fee shall be a fixed rate, set at a maximum of USD 2,000 per request. If the proposed change increases the scale of the activity to bring the scale to a higher tier of the fee structure, the difference from the paid registration fee shall be payable in addition to the fixed-rate post-registration change fee.
				56.	All the fees referred to in paragraphs 50–55 above shall be paid at the time of submission of the respective requests. The initiation of processing of a request shall be subject to the payment of the fee.
				57.	The paid fees may be reimbursed partially or in full under certain conditions, to be specified by the Supervisory Body.
				58.	All the fees referred to in paragraphs 50–55 above shall be waived for activities in the least developed countries and small island developing States.
				59.	The Supervisory Body may adjust and implement the fee structure and levels within the boundary to be set by the CMA, on the basis of the guiding principles of balancing the income and the expenditure, enabling long-term sound operation of the Article 6.4 mechanism, being fair to activity participants, ensuring administrative efficiency and providing predictability to activity participants and the Supervisory Body.
			B.	Share of proceeds for adaptation
				60.	The Adaptation Fund Board and its support structure shall develop and implement a strategy on monetizing A6.4ERs in the share of proceeds for adaptation account held by the Adaptation Fund in the mechanism registry, and inform the state of monetization annually to the CMA.
				61.	Pursuant to paragraph 67(b) of the RMPs, the secretariat shall transfer the monetary contributions from individual Article 6.4 activities as set by the Supervisory Body to the Adaptation Fund annually.
				62.	Pursuant to paragraph 67(c) of the RMPs, the Supervisory Body shall review annually the state of the remaining funds as a result of the income from the fees referred to in paragraphs 50–55 above and the expenditure for operating the Article 6.4 mechanism, decide the timing and the amount of funds to be transferred to the Adaptation Fund after setting aside the operational reserve for at least three years based on the projection of surplus of funds, implement the transfer accordingly and report to the CMA on the state of the transfer annually.
		VI.	Processes necessary for delivering overall mitigation in global emissions
			63.	Mandatory cancellations of A6.4ERs for the delivery of OMGE referred to in paragraph 59 of the RMPs shall apply to A6.4ERs, in accordance with chapter IV.B above (Transaction procedure).
			64.	Pursuant to paragraph 69(a) of the RMPs, activity participants may request mandatory cancellations for OMGE in addition to the mandatory cancellation of a minimum of 2 per cent of issued A6.4ERs as part of their activity documentation by indicating such increase in their request for issuance of A6.4ERs in accordance with the procedures to be developed by the Supervisory Body.
			65.	Pursuant to paragraph 70 of the RMPs, Parties, activity participants and stakeholders may request voluntary cancellation of A6.4ERs in the mechanism registry for the purpose of delivering further OMGE that has been correspondingly adjusted in accordance with chapter III.B (Application of corresponding adjustments) of the annex to decision 2/CMA.3, in accordance with the procedures to be developed by the Supervisory Body.
			66.	Public availability of information pertaining to mandatory and voluntary cancellations for OMGE, linkages and information exchange with the Article 6 database referred to in the annex to decision 2/CMA.3 and the mechanism registry shall be in accordance with the modalities for the Article 6 database and the mechanism registry respectively.
			67.	The Supervisory Body shall provide, in its annual reports to the CMA, information on aggregated amounts that were cancelled for OMGE together with any relevant qualitative information, distinguishing between mandatory and voluntary cancellations for OMGE.
			1.	
	Annex II
		Rules of procedure of the Supervisory Body for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement
		I.	Scope
			1.	These rules of procedure shall apply to all activities of the Supervisory Body for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement (Article 6.4 mechanism) undertaken in accordance with decision 3/CMA.3, including the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism contained in the annex thereto, and any other decisions on the mechanism adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA).
		II.	Definitions
			2.	For the purpose of these rules of procedure:
				(a)	“Conflict of interest” refers to any current professional, financial or other interest that could significantly impair the individual’s objectivity in carrying out their duties and responsibilities for the Supervisory Body or create an unfair advantage for any person or organization; circumstances that could lead a reasonable person to question an individual’s objectivity or whether an unfair advantage has been created constitute a potential conflict of interest;
				(b)	“Secretariat” means the secretariat referred to in Article 17 of the Paris Agreement and paragraph 25 of the rules, modalities and procedures for the Article 6.4 mechanism;
				(c)	“Stakeholders” mean the entities, groups, forums, communities and individuals that have a role in the implementation of the functions of the Supervisory Body or that may affect or be directly affected by the recommendations and actions of the Body.
		III.	Membership
			A.	Composition
				3.	The Supervisory Body shall comprise 12 members from Parties to the Paris Agreement, ensuring broad and equitable geographical representation and striving to ensure gender-balanced representation, as follows:
					(a)	Two members from each of the five United Nations regional groups;
					(b)	One member from the least developed countries;
					(c)	One member from small island developing States (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 4).
			B.	Nomination and election
				4.	The CMA shall elect members and an alternate for each member of the Supervisory Body on the basis of nominations by the respective groups and constituencies (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 5).
				5.	The nomination by a group or constituency of a candidate member shall be accompanied by a nomination for a candidate alternate member from the same group or constituency.
				6.	Members and alternate members shall serve in their individual expert capacity (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 6).
				7.	Members and alternate members shall act in an independent and impartial manner in performing their duties in the Supervisory Body.
				8.	Members and alternate members shall possess relevant scientific, technical, socioeconomic or legal expertise (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 7).
				9.	In the absence of a member from a meeting of the Supervisory Body, their alternate shall serve as the member for that meeting.
				10.	If a member is not available for a period for their duties in between meetings, they may delegate their role as member to their alternate for a specified period by informing the Supervisory Body and the secretariat in advance.
				11.	Any reference in these rules of procedure to a member shall be deemed to include their alternate when such alternate acts for the member.
				12.	Participation costs for members and alternate members will be covered by the share of proceeds for administrative expenses (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 14).
				13.	Funding for participation shall be provided in accordance with the financial regulations of the United Nations and the financial procedures of the UNFCCC.
			C.	Term of membership
				14.	Members and alternate members shall serve for a term of two years (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 8).
				15.	Notwithstanding paragraph 14 above, in the first election of members and alternate members, the CMA shall elect half of the members and their alternate members for a term of three years and the other half for a term of two years. At the expiry of the term of these members and their alternate members and thereafter, the CMA shall elect replacement members and their alternate members for a term of two years. The members and their alternate members shall remain in office until their successors have been elected (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 9).
				16.	The term of service of a member shall start at the first meeting of the Supervisory Body in the calendar year following their election and shall end immediately before the first meeting of the Supervisory Body in the calendar year in which the term ends (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 10).
				17.	The maximum number of terms of any individual shall be two terms, whether consecutive or not and including any period as an alternate member (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 11).
			D.	Resignation, suspension and termination of membership
				18.	If a member or alternate member resigns or is otherwise unable to continue as a member or alternate member, the Supervisory Body may decide, bearing in mind the proximity to the next session of the CMA, to appoint a replacement member or replacement alternate member from the same constituency to serve the remainder of the term on the basis of a nomination from the relevant constituency, in which case the appointment shall count as one term (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 12).
				19.	The Supervisory Body shall request the relevant group or constituency to nominate the new member, or the new alternate member, to be appointed in accordance with paragraph 18 above.
				20.	Members and alternate members may be suspended, or their membership terminated by the CMA, if:
					(a)	They fail to comply with paragraph 25 below or the oath of service referred to in paragraph 30 below;
					(b)	They fail to attend two consecutive meetings without proper justification (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 13).
				21.	The Supervisory Body may suspend the membership of a particular member or alternate member and recommend to the CMA the termination of their membership for any of the reasons listed in paragraph 20 above or for failing to comply with the provisions in chapter IV below.
				22.	Any motion calling for the suspension of, and recommendation to the CMA to terminate, the membership of a member or alternate member shall immediately be considered in accordance with chapter VII below. When such a motion and recommendation concern the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall act as Chair until the decision on the motion has been announced.
				23.	The Supervisory Body shall suspend and recommend termination of the membership of a member or alternate member only after the member or alternate member has been afforded the opportunity of a hearing by the Supervisory Body.
		IV.	Duties and conduct
			24.	Members and alternate members shall be bound by these rules of procedure.
			A.	Code of conduct
				25.	Members and alternate members shall perform any duties and exercise any authority in an honourable, independent, impartial and conscientious manner as follows:
					(a)	They shall observe at all times and from the date of their election the highest standards of ethical conduct in the performance of their duties and functions as outlined below. Such duties and functions shall be performed in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and these rules of procedure;
					(b)	They shall treat all persons involved in the meetings and processes of the Supervisory Body with dignity and respect and conduct themselves in line with the values of the United Nations;
					(c)	They shall not abuse their authority or directly or indirectly accept, offer or provide any gift, advantage or reward that can be reasonably perceived as intended to influence the performance of their functions and their independence;
					(d)	They shall not engage in any form of discrimination or harassment, including sexual harassment.
			B.	Conflict of interest
				26.	Members and alternate members shall avoid actual, potential and perceived conflicts of interest and shall:
					(a)	Declare any actual, potential or perceived conflict of interest at the start of a meeting;
					(b)	Refrain from participating in any work of the Supervisory Body, including decision-making, in relation to which they have an actual, potential or perceived conflict of interest;
					(c)	Refrain from behaviour that may be incompatible with the requirements of independence and impartiality (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 15).
				27.	Members and alternate members shall have no pecuniary or financial interest in any aspect of the Article 6.4 mechanism activity, any designated operational entity or any matters considered by the Supervisory Body. The Supervisory Body shall take measures to mitigate the risk thereof, such as developing provisions for financial disclosure by members and alternate members.
				28.	Members and alternate members shall make available their curricula vitae and details of any past and current professional affiliations with the secretariat for publication on the UNFCCC website and shall inform the secretariat of any changes thereto.
			C.	Confidentiality
				29.	Members and alternate members shall ensure confidentiality in line with relevant best practice and decisions of the CMA and the Supervisory Body (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 16).
			D.	Oath of service
				30.	Members and alternate members shall take a written oath of service witnessed by the Executive Secretary of the UNFCCC or an authorized representative before assuming their duties. The text of the written oath of service is contained in the appendix.
				31.	Electronic submission of the signed oath of service by members and alternate members is sufficient to fulfil the requirements of these rules of procedure.
		V.	Chair and Vice-Chair
			32.	Each year the Supervisory Body shall elect a Chair and a Vice-Chair from among its members. The Chair and the Vice-Chair shall remain in office until their successors have been elected (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 18). In this context, the Supervisory Body shall take fully into account the consideration of regional and gender balance.
			33.	The secretary of the Supervisory Body shall preside over the opening of the first meeting of a calendar year and conduct the election of the new Chair and Vice-Chair.
			34.	If the elected Chair is not able to serve in that capacity at a meeting, the Vice-Chair shall serve as Chair. If neither is able to serve in their respective capacity, the Supervisory Body shall elect a member from among those present to serve as Chair for that meeting.
			35.	If the Chair or the Vice-Chair is unable to complete their term of office, the Supervisory Body shall elect a new Chair or Vice-Chair from among its members for the remainder of the term.
			36.	In addition to exercising the functions conferred upon the Chair elsewhere in these rules of procedure, the Chair shall declare the opening and closing of meetings, preside over meetings, ensure the observance of these rules of procedure, give the right to speak, put questions to a vote and announce decisions. The Chair shall rule on points of order and, subject to these rules of procedure, have complete control over the proceedings and maintenance of order at meetings.
			37.	The Chair may propose to the Supervisory Body a limitation on allowed speaking time and the number of times each member or alternate member may speak on a question, the adjournment or closure of the debate or the suspension or adjournment of a meeting.
			38.	The Chair, the Vice-Chair or any other member or alternate member designated by the Supervisory Body shall represent the Body as necessary, including to report to the CMA at its sessions and to manage the public communications of the Supervisory Body, including with stakeholders.
		VI.	Meetings
			A.	Dates and location
				39.	The Supervisory Body shall meet with the frequency and at the times and locations agreed by it, taking into account the need for efficient use of resources and proximity to the dates of sessions of the UNFCCC governing and subsidiary bodies.
				40.	The meetings of the Supervisory Body shall take place in the country of the seat of the secretariat unless otherwise decided by the Body and subject to the necessary arrangements being made by the secretariat in consultation with the Chair.
				41.	At the first Supervisory Body meeting of each calendar year, the Chair shall propose for the approval of the Body a schedule of meetings for that calendar year.
				42.	If changes to the schedule or additional meetings are required, the Chair shall, after consultation with all members, give notice of any changes to the dates of scheduled meetings and the dates of any additional meetings.
				43.	The secretariat, in consultation with the Chair, shall give notice of the dates of each meeting of the Supervisory Body not less than eight weeks prior to the meeting.
				44.	Members and alternate members may participate in meetings in person or virtually. Both means of participation shall confer the same rights and responsibilities at meetings.
				45.	If all members and alternate members participate in a meeting virtually, any decisions taken by the Supervisory Body shall be deemed to have been taken at the seat of the secretariat in Bonn.
			B.	Quorum
				46.	At least three fourths of the members, including alternate members only when they are acting as members, shall constitute a quorum for meetings of the Supervisory Body (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 17).
				47.	The virtual participation of a member or alternate member acting as a member in a meeting counts towards a quorum for the meeting.
			C.	Agenda and documentation for meetings
				48.	Additions or changes to the provisional agenda for a meeting may be proposed to the secretariat by any member or alternate member and incorporated into the proposed agenda, provided that the member or alternate member gives notice thereof to the secretariat not less than four weeks before the meeting. The proposed agenda for the meeting shall be transmitted by the secretariat to all those invited to the meeting three weeks before the meeting.
				49.	The Supervisory Body shall, at the beginning of each meeting, adopt the agenda for the meeting.
				50.	Any item on the agenda for a meeting of the Supervisory Body, the consideration of which has not been completed at that meeting, shall be included automatically in the provisional agenda for the next meeting, unless otherwise decided by the Supervisory Body.
				51.	All documentation for a meeting of the Supervisory Body shall be made available to members and alternate members by the secretariat at least two weeks before the meeting unless otherwise decided by the Chair.
				52.	The Supervisory Body shall receive public comments, including from stakeholders, on meeting documentation up until one week prior to the meeting, unless otherwise decided by the Chair.
			D.	Transparency
				53.	Meetings of the Supervisory Body shall be open to the public, including via electronic means, and a recording shall be made available via electronic means unless closed for reasons of confidentiality (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 19).
				54.	Documents for meetings of the Supervisory Body shall be made publicly available, unless they are confidential (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 20).
				55.	The Supervisory Body shall ensure transparency of decision-making and make publicly available its decision-making framework and decisions, including standards, procedures and related documents (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 21).
			E.	Participation of observers in meetings
				56.	Meetings of the Supervisory Body shall be open to attendance, as observers, by any Party or UNFCCC-admitted observer organization unless closed for reasons of confidentiality.
				57.	The Supervisory Body may, in the interests of economy and efficiency, decide to limit the in-person attendance of observers at its meetings.
				58.	Observers may, upon invitation by the Supervisory Body, make presentations relating to matters under consideration by the Supervisory Body at its meetings.
				59.	The Supervisory Body may invite specific stakeholders to a meeting to seek their views on specific items on the agenda for the meeting.
			F.	Record of meetings
				60.	The Supervisory Body shall adopt reports on its meetings and make them publicly available (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 23). The reports may reflect divergent views expressed by members and alternate members on the matters considered at the meetings.
				61.	The Supervisory Body may, separately from the reports referred to in paragraph 60 above, prepare internal reports containing confidential information relating to the outcomes of its meetings.
				62.	Before the end of each meeting, the Chair shall present draft conclusions and decisions taken at the meeting for consideration and approval by the Supervisory Body. Any written records of the Supervisory Body or recordings of proceedings shall be kept by the secretariat in accordance with United Nations rules and regulations.
		VII.	Decision-making
			A.	General
				63.	Decisions of the Supervisory Body shall be taken by consensus whenever possible. If all efforts at reaching consensus have been exhausted, decisions shall be put to vote and adopted by a majority of three fourths of the members, including alternate members only when they are acting as members, present and voting (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 22).
				64.	Alternate members shall participate in all the proceedings of meetings of the Supervisory Body except for the voting referred to in paragraph 66 below.
				65.	The Chair shall ascertain, in their judgment, whether consensus has been reached. The Chair shall declare that consensus has not been reached if there is a stated objection by a member, or by an alternate member acting as a member, to the proposed decision under consideration.
				66.	If all efforts at reaching consensus have been exhausted, as a last resort the following voting procedures shall apply:
					(a)	The Chair shall announce that the matter will be put to vote and provide a draft decision;
					(b)	Each member shall have one vote;
					(c)	The phrase “members present and voting” means members present at the meeting at which the voting takes place and casting an affirmative or negative vote;
					(d)	Members abstaining from voting shall be considered as not voting for the purpose of determining the three-fourths majority;
					(e)	An alternate member may cast a vote only if acting as a member;
					(f)	The Chair and the Vice-Chair shall retain their right to vote.
			B.	Electronic decision-making
				67.	The Supervisory Body may, in writing using electronic means, take decisions between meetings. The following electronic decision-making rules shall apply:
					(a)	Whenever, in the judgment of the Chair, a decision must be taken by the Supervisory Body that cannot be postponed until its next meeting, the Chair shall transmit to each member a proposed decision with an invitation to approve it by consensus. Together with the proposed decision, the Chair shall provide, subject to the applicable confidentiality requirements, the relevant facts that, in the Chair’s judgment, justify the decision-making by electronic means and the proposed decision;
					(b)	The proposed decision shall be transmitted in the form of an electronic written message to all members of the Supervisory Body. A quorum of the Supervisory Body is required through confirmation of receipt of the message. Such message shall also be transmitted to alternate members for information;
					(c)	Members shall be given two weeks from the date of receipt of the proposed decision to provide comments. Alternate members may also provide comments, recognizing that they do not have the right to vote. The comments shall be made available in the form of an electronic written message to all members and alternate members;
					(d)	At the expiration of the period referred to in paragraph 67(c) above, the proposed decision shall be considered approved if there is no objection by any member. If an objection is raised, the Chair shall include consideration of the proposed decision as an item in the proposed agenda for the next meeting of the Supervisory Body and inform the Body accordingly.
				68.	Any decision made via the procedure specified in paragraph 67 above shall be included in the report on the Supervisory Body’s next meeting and shall be deemed to have been taken at the seat of the secretariat.
				69.	The Supervisory Body may decide to use different processes for decision-making on specific cases in accordance with relevant procedures adopted by the Body for the activity cycle, accreditation, methodology development and other specific processes for efficiency in operating the Article 6.4 mechanism.
		VIII.	Expert groups
			70.	The Supervisory Body may establish expert groups comprising internal or external experts, such as committees, panels, working groups and/or rosters of experts, as required, to assist it in performing its functions and achieving its objectives. The Supervisory Body may draw on the expertise necessary to perform its functions, including from the UNFCCC roster of experts. In this context, it shall take fully into account the consideration of regional and gender balance.
		IX.	Secretariat
			71.	Pursuant to Article 17 of the Paris Agreement and in accordance with relevant decisions of the CMA, the secretariat shall serve as the secretariat of the Supervisory Body and perform its functions in the operation of the mechanism in accordance with the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism (decision 3/CMA.3, annex, para. 25).
			72.	The Executive Secretary of the UNFCCC shall arrange for the provision of its staff and services required for the servicing of the Supervisory Body from within available resources. The Executive Secretary shall manage and direct such staff and services and provide appropriate support and advice to the Supervisory Body.
			73.	An official of the secretariat designated by the Executive Secretary shall serve as the secretary of the Supervisory Body.
			74.	In addition to the functions specified in the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism and/or any subsequent decision of the CMA, the secretariat shall, in accordance with these rules of procedure and subject to the availability of resources:
				(a)	Make necessary arrangements for meetings of the Supervisory Body, including announcing meetings, issuing invitations and making available documents for the meetings, including but not limited to receiving, reproducing and distributing the documents to members and alternate members;
				(b)	Maintain meeting records and arrange for the storage and preservation of meeting documents and make them publicly available subject to confidentiality provisions;
				(c)	Maintain a public web-based system containing all decisions, regulatory documents and any other relevant documents adopted by the Supervisory Body subject to confidentiality provisions;
				(d)	Perform all other functions that the Supervisory Body may require or that the CMA may mandate with respect to the work of the Body.
			75.	The rules, regulations, policies and procedures of the secretariat and the United Nations, as applicable, shall apply to all functions performed by the secretariat pursuant to these rules of procedure. In the event of any conflict between such rules, regulations, policies and procedures and these rules of the procedure, the former shall apply.
		X.	Working language
			76.	The working language of the Supervisory Body shall be English.
			77.	Documents for meetings of the Supervisory Body shall be provided in English only.
		XI.	Amendments to these rules of procedure
			78.	The Supervisory Body may recommend amendments to these rules of procedure for consideration and adoption by the CMA.
			
Appendix
	Written oath of service
		The written oath of service shall read as follows:
		“I solemnly declare that I shall perform my duties as a member or alternate member of the Supervisory Body for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement honourably, faithfully, impartially and conscientiously.
		I further solemnly declare and promise that I shall have no financial interest in any aspect of the mechanism, including accreditation of operational entities, registration of activities under the mechanism and/or issuance of Article 6, paragraph 4, emission reductions. Subject to my responsibilities to the Supervisory Body, I shall not disclose, even after the termination of my functions, any confidential or proprietary information that is transferred to the Supervisory Body in accordance with the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism, or any other confidential information coming to my knowledge by reason of my duties for the Supervisory Body.
		I shall disclose to the Executive Secretary of the UNFCCC and to the Supervisory Body any interest in any matter under discussion by the Supervisory Body that may constitute an actual, potential or perceived conflict of interest or might be incompatible with the requirements of integrity and impartiality expected of a member or alternate member of the Supervisory Body, and I shall refrain from participating in any work of the Supervisory Body, including decision-making, in relation to such matter.
		I shall act in an independent and impartial manner in performing my duties in the Supervisory Body.
		As a member or alternate member of the Supervisory Body, I will, specifically:
		(a)	Discharge my duties with honesty, integrity and full regard for my responsibilities as a member or alternate member of the Supervisory Body;
		(b)	Respect the confidentiality of all confidential information acquired in my position as a member or alternate member of the Supervisory Body and not make improper use of or disclose such confidential information to third parties;
		(c)	Observe the principles of independence and integrity in dealings with other members and alternate members of the Supervisory Body, the UNFCCC secretariat and stakeholders;
		(d)	Exercise a conservative approach to deciding whether I have an actual, potential or perceived conflict of interest with respect to any matter under consideration by the Supervisory Body and take appropriate action, which may include remaining silent and/or leaving the room during deliberations and decisions of the Supervisory Body;
		(e)	Disclose to the Supervisory Body any actual, potential or perceived conflict of interest of a direct or indirect nature of which I am aware and which I believe could compromise in any way the reputation or performance of the Supervisory Body;
		(f)	Make available to the Executive Secretary of the UNFCCC my curriculum vitae and details of past and current professional affiliations and inform the Executive Secretary of any changes thereto.
		I shall abide by the code of conduct referred to in paragraph 25 of the rules of procedure of the Supervisory Body.”
		10th plenary meeting
		20 November 2022
			
			
	Decision 8/CMA.4
		Matters relating to the work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
			Recalling decision 4/CMA.3 and the Paris Agreement,
			Noting with appreciation the contributions received from Parties and observers in support of implementing the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement,
			1.	Welcomes the report of the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches that includes progress in and recommendations for implementing the work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 4/CMA.3;
		I.	Schedule for implementing the work programme activities
			2.	Adopts the schedule for implementing the activities of the work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 4/CMA.3 for 2023–2024 and the schedule for implementing the activities for 2025–2026 set out below;
			3.	Requests the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches to continue implementing the work programme activities referred to in chapter V of the annex to decision 4/CMA.3 for 2023–2026 in two phases:
				(a)	A first phase (2023–2024) that focuses on identifying and framing all relevant elements of the work programme activities referred to in paragraph 8 of the annex to decision 4/CMA.3 and operationalizing the UNFCCC web-based platform referred to in paragraph 5 below;
				(b)	A second phase (2025–2026) that focuses on fully implementing the work programme activities referred to in paragraph 3(a) above following a learning-by-doing approach and drawing on inputs from the first phase, recognizing that some elements can be implemented earlier in the first phase, with priority given to existing non-market approaches;
			4.	Also requests the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches to undertake an expedited and simple assessment of the progress and outcomes of the first phase as referred to in paragraph 3(a) above at its 6th meeting, to be held in November 2024, with a view to improving and recommending the schedule for implementing the work programme activities for the second phase, taking into account any additional relevant mandates received from the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its sixth session (November 2024), and recalling that the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice is to review the work programme at its sixty-fourth (2026) and sixty-fifth (2026) sessions in accordance with paragraph 10 of decision 4/CMA.3;
		II.	UNFCCC web-based platform for non-market approaches
			5.	Requests the secretariat to develop and operationalize the UNFCCC web-based platform referred to in paragraph 8(b)(i) of the annex to decision 4/CMA.3 for recording and exchanging information on non-market approaches in a user-friendly and accessible manner, including recording support needed and provided, for Parties participating in non-market approaches and other non-Party stakeholders, in accordance with standard UNFCCC practices for web-based communications and the specifications referred to in paragraphs 6–‍13 below;
			6.	Decides that the UNFCCC web-based platform is to facilitate opportunities, including by connecting participating Parties, to identify, develop and implement non-market approaches and to record and exchange information, for Parties that have submitted non-market approaches and are seeking support, and Parties and entities that have submitted information on the support available;
			7.	Also decides that a Party participating in a non-market approach may, with the concurrence of the other participating Parties, voluntarily:
				(a)	Submit via its UNFCCC national focal point the following information on the non-market approaches to the secretariat for recording it on the UNFCCC web-based platform:
					(i)	A description of the non-market approach and the implementing entities, including their contact information;
					(ii)	Information on how the non-market approach addresses the criteria referred to in paragraphs 2–3 of the annex to decision 4/CMA.3;
					(iii)	Updates to the information already provided on the non-market approach, as applicable, including any available reporting on progress in implementing the non-market approach or any lessons learned or case studies relating to the non-market approach;
					(iv)	A description of the financial, technology and capacity-building support needed to identify, develop and implement the non-market approach;
				(b)	Undertake Party-driven facilitation and matching to identify, develop and implement non-market approaches and record the information on the UNFCCC web-based platform;
			8.	Invites interested Parties, relevant bodies, institutional arrangements and processes under the Convention and the Paris Agreement related to, inter alia, mitigation, adaptation, finance, technology development and transfer, and capacity-building, including United Nations bodies, multilateral, bilateral and other public donors, and private and non-governmental organizations to provide information on financial, technology and capacity-building support available or provided for identifying, developing or implementing non-market approaches for recording on the UNFCCC web-based platform;
			9.	Notes that recording information on a non-market approach or support available or needed on the UNFCCC web-based platform is for information exchange purposes only, and neither creates any rights or obligations for any Party or other entity nor represents endorsement or approval of the non-market approach;
			10.	Requests the secretariat, subject to the availability of resources, to facilitate opportunities for participating Parties to identify, develop and implement non-market approaches by:
				(a)	Organizing an in-session workshop, including plenary presentations and round-table discussions, to be held in conjunction with each meeting of the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches, to exchange information on the non-market approaches including best practices and lessons learned from identifying, developing and implementing non-market approaches as well as non-market approaches that may require financial, technology and capacity-building support and the support available for such non-market approaches;
				(b)	Preparing a report on each workshop for consideration by the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches at its subsequent meeting;
			11.	Decides that the UNFCCC web-based platform is to contain an information hub that provides information on available resources and tools, including links to relevant websites and news; a visualization tool for mapping non-market approaches and initiatives that support Parties in meeting the requirements for receiving support and provide capacity-building for implementing non-market approaches; and a discussion forum for Parties and non-Party stakeholders to facilitate networking among active users of the platform, present information on non-market approaches, including information identified through implementing the work programme, such as information on non-market approaches resulting from the activities referred to in paragraph 10(a) above, and include a function for searching information on non-market approaches, including by keyword or tag;
			12.	Requests the secretariat to provide regular updates on the status of the development and operationalization of the UNFCCC web-based platform for each meeting of the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches and to notify Parties’ UNFCCC national focal points of the deployment of the fully operational web-based platform and enable their access to it;
			13.	Encourages Parties to submit information on non-market approaches in the focus areas of the work programme activities for recording on the UNFCCC web-based platform once it becomes operational;
		III.	Additional focus areas of the work programme activities
			14.	Recalls the importance of integrated, holistic and balanced non-market approaches facilitated under the framework for non-market approaches and the aim of the approaches to promote mitigation and adaptation ambition as referred to in decision 4/CMA.3;
			15.	Takes note of the diverse range of potential additional focus areas for non-market approaches that may be facilitated under the framework, as identified by Parties and observers in previous rounds of submissions of views, synthesis reports and an in-session workshop;
			16.	Requests the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches to identify and recommend additional focus areas for the work programme activities, taking into consideration the experience of Parties in implementing non-market approaches and information provided on the UNFCCC web-based platform, including keywords and tags, for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, as appropriate;
		IV.	Enhanced networking and collaboration on non-market approaches
			17.	Invites Parties to use, as appropriate, spin-off groups during the meetings of the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches to enable more detailed discussions among interested Parties on specific topics identified by the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches;
			18.	Requests the Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice, as the convenor of the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches, to invite representatives of relevant UNFCCC constituted bodies and institutional arrangements under or serving the Paris Agreement and/or the Convention, which may include the Adaptation Fund, the Climate Technology Centre and Network, the Global Environment Facility, the Green Climate Fund, the Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform, the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, the Standing Committee on Finance and the Technology Executive Committee, to a meeting held in conjunction with the fifty-eighth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (June 2023) and organized with the assistance of the secretariat, with the aim of enhancing collaboration between the Glasgow Committee and relevant constituted bodies and institutional arrangements under or serving the Paris Agreement and/or the Convention, as necessary, taking into account their respective mandates;
			19.	Also requests the secretariat to prepare a technical paper, without formal status, for consideration by the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches at its 3rd meeting, on possibilities for enhancing engagement with public and private sector stakeholders, including technical experts, businesses, civil society organizations and financial institutions, at meetings of the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches, taking into account experience of approaches to enhancing such engagement under the UNFCCC;
		V.	Cross-cutting matters
			20.	Encourages Parties, public and private sector stakeholders and civil society organizations to actively engage in developing and implementing non-market approaches under the framework for such approaches;
			21.	Requests the secretariat to include as part of its broader capacity-building programme related to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement activities related to the work programme under the framework for non-market approaches;
			22.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in this decision;
			23.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
			10th plenary meeting
			20 November 2022
			
			
	Decision 9/CMA.4
		Reviews on a voluntary basis of the information reported pursuant to decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter IV, and respective training courses needed
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
			Recalling Article 13 of the Paris Agreement,
			Also recalling decision 18/CMA.1 and annex, and decision 5/CMA.3 and annexes IV, VI and VII,
			Recognizing that flexibility for those developing country Parties that need it in the light of their capacities is reflected in the modalities, procedures and guidelines for the transparency framework for action and support referred to in Article 13 of the Paris Agreement, contained in the annex to decision 18/CMA.1,
			Also recognizing the important role that reviews on a voluntary basis of the information reported pursuant to decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter IV, could play in facilitating improved reporting of that information over time and enhancing national capacity and the capacity of adaptation experts, especially from developing country Parties,
			Further recognizing the important role that voluntary reviews could play in facilitating the sharing of experience and best practices related to reporting such information,
			Recalling Article 13, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement, which provides that the purpose of the framework for transparency of action is to provide a clear understanding of climate change action in the light of the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2, including clarity and tracking of progress towards achieving Parties’ individual nationally determined contributions under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement, and Parties’ adaptation actions under Article 7 of the Paris Agreement, including good practices, priorities, needs and gaps, in order to inform the global stocktake under Article 14 of the Paris Agreement, and recognizing that voluntary reviews of the information reported pursuant to decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter IV, would contribute to that end,
			Also recognizing the important role that reviews could play in facilitating improved reporting and recalling that the information reported pursuant to decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter IV, constitutes an important input to the global stocktake and hence facilitates the assessment of collective progress towards achieving the purpose of the Paris Agreement, including by facilitating consideration of collective progress towards achieving the global goal on adaptation and recognition of the adaptation efforts of developing country Parties and by enhancing the reporting of information related to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with climate change impacts,
			Recognizing the need to undertake the voluntary reviews in an efficient manner without placing undue burden on the technical expert review teams, Parties or the secretariat,
			Also recognizing the importance of training the experts who conduct the voluntary reviews and allocating resources to facilitate such reviews,
				1.	Decides that a Party may, on a voluntary basis, request the secretariat to organize a review of the information reported by the Party pursuant to decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter IV, as part of the technical expert review pursuant to decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter VII;
				2.	Also decides that the voluntary review, taking into account decision 18/CMA.1, annex, paragraphs 147–149, consists of:
					(a)	Reviewing the information reported by the Party in its biennial transparency report, in accordance with the modalities, procedures and guidelines contained in decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter IV;
					(b)	Facilitating the improvement of the reporting of information pursuant to decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter IV, by identifying, in consultation with the Party, areas of improvement and capacity-building needs related to reporting;
				3.	Further decides that the Party undergoing the voluntary review may select specific sections of the chapter in the biennial transparency report pursuant to decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter IV, for particular attention by the expert review team conducting the review;
				4.	Decides that a Party may submit a request for the voluntary review to the secretariat either in the overview section of the biennial transparency report or when agreeing with the secretariat the dates of the technical expert review;
				5.	Also decides that the outcome of the voluntary review should be presented in a dedicated annex to the technical expert review report referred to in decision 18/CMA.1, annex, paragraph 187;
				6.	Requests the secretariat to include in the technical expert review team for conducting the voluntary review an expert with expertise in the areas outlined in decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter IV, who has completed the course on general and cross-cutting aspects for the technical expert review under the enhanced transparency framework under the Paris Agreement referred to in decision 5/CMA.3, annex VII, and the training course referred to in paragraph 8 below, taking into account decision 5/CMA.3, paragraph 34;
				7.	Reiterates the invitation to Parties and, as appropriate, intergovernmental organizations to nominate technical experts with expertise and experience in the areas outlined in decision 18/CMA.1, annex, chapter IV, to the UNFCCC roster of experts;
				8.	Requests the secretariat to develop and implement a training course for experts participating in the review referred to in paragraph 1 above, incorporating, as appropriate, technical advice from the Consultative Group of Experts and lead reviewers, as part of the training programme outlined in decision 5/CMA.3, annex VII, and taking into account decision 5/CMA.3, paragraphs 33–34;
				9.	Also requests the secretariat to report on progress in developing the training course referred to in paragraph 8 above to the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice at its fifty-eighth (June 2023) and each subsequent session until the development of the training course has been completed;
				10.	Decides to undertake a review of the training course in the context of the review of the modalities, procedures and guidelines contained in the annex to decision 18/CMA.1 no later than in 2028 and to consider integrating into the training course relevant outcomes from the Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3;
				11.	Invites developed country Parties to provide financial resources to enable the secretariat to develop and implement the training course in a timely manner, while other Parties are encouraged to do so on a voluntary basis;
				12.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 1 and 8 above;
				13.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
			9th plenary meeting
			17 November 2022
				
			
		Decision 10/CMA.4
	Report of the Adaptation Committee for 2022 and review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
		1.	Welcomes the work of the Adaptation Committee in 2022 and takes note of the report of the Adaptation Committee covering its work between September 2021 and September 2022, contained in document FCCC/SB/2022/5 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1 and Add. 2, and the recommendations therein;
		2.	Also takes note of the progress of the Adaptation Committee in improving its outreach and communication efforts and encourages the Committee to make further use of platforms for outreach, communication in languages other than English and the organization of regional events and knowledge dialogues as ways to improve the dissemination, understanding and use of its knowledge products by organizations and practitioners within and outside the UNFCCC process and in all geographical regions;
		3.	Takes note of the engagement of the Adaptation Committee with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change with regard to its work in relation to decisions 9/CMA.1, paragraph 15, and 11/CMA.1, paragraph 17, and requests the Adaptation Committee to further engage with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change on technical and substantive work;
		4.	Notes that considerations of the review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee as it relates to the Paris Agreement could not be completed at this session and will therefore continue at the fifty-eighth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (June 2023);
		5.	Encourages Parties to make available sufficient resources for the successful and timely implementation of the flexible workplan of the Adaptation Committee for 2022–‍‍2024.
		10th plenary meeting
		20 November 2022
		
		
		Decision 11/CMA.4
	Matters relating to the least developed countries
		The Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling decisions 5/CP.7, 29/CP.7, 7/CP.9, 4/CP.10, 4/CP.11, 8/CP.13, 6/CP.16, 5/CP.17, 12/CP.18, 3/CP.20, 1/CP.21, 19/CP.21, 16/CP.24, 7/CP.25, 15/CP.26, 11/CMA.1 and 19/CMA.1,
		Having considered the report on the 42nd meeting of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group,
		Underscoring the importance of continued implementation by the Green Climate Fund of the mandate given to it in decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 46,
			1.	Welcome the progress of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group in implementing its work programme for 2022–2023, including its provision of support to the least developed countries for developing project concepts for implementing adaptation actions associated with the priorities in their national adaptation plans;
			2.	Also welcome the successful conduct by the Least Developed Countries Expert Group of the national adaptation plan writing workshop for Asia-Pacific least developed countries held in Siem Reap, Cambodia, from 12 to 15 July 2022 and the NAP Expo held in Gaborone, Botswana, from 22 to 26 August 2022;
			3.	Express their appreciation to the Government of Cambodia for hosting the workshop referred to in paragraph 2 above and the Government of Botswana for hosting the 42nd meeting of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group and NAP Expo 2022 and express their gratitude to the Government of Ireland for providing financial support for the work of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group;
			4.	Express their appreciation to the Least Developed Countries Expert Group and the secretariat for their valuable work in supporting adaptation in the least developed countries;
			5.	Also express their appreciation to the organizations that contributed to designing and conducting the workshop referred to in paragraph 2 above;
			6.	Welcome the progress of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group in developing technical guidelines for the implementation of national adaptation plans and note that those guidelines may help to address gaps and needs relating to the formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans and for informing the design and provision of support for the implementation of national adaptation plans;
			7.	Also note the limited progress of the least developed countries on the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans and the need for enhanced support of the least developed countries to advance the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans;
			8.	Further note that, as at 14 November 2022, 17 of the 46 least developed countries had submitted a national adaptation plan since the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans was established in 2010, and of those 17 least developed countries with a national adaptation plan, 14 had accessed funding for implementing adaptation actions associated with the priorities identified therein;
			9.	Reiterate and recall decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 46, and note decision 16/CP.27 in relation to enhancing support to the least developed countries for the formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans;
			10.	Underscore the importance of developing project pipelines and proposals for implementing adaptation actions associated with the priorities in the national adaptation plans of the least developed countries and encourage relevant organizations, as well as operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, to enhance support to the least developed countries in this regard;
			11.	Note with appreciation the financial pledges, totalling USD 70.6 million, made by the Governments of Denmark, Finland, Germany, Ireland, Slovenia, Sweden and Switzerland and the government of the Walloon Region of Belgium to the Least Developed Countries Fund and urge additional contributions to the Fund;
			12.	Request the Least Developed Countries Expert Group to enhance the support provided to the least developed countries for aligning national adaptation plans and nationally determined contributions;
			13.	Also request the Least Developed Countries Expert Group to continue to support the least developed countries in integrating gender considerations into the formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans;
			14.	Welcome the development by the Least Developed Countries Expert Group of its draft rules of procedure;
			15.	Adopt the rules of procedure of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group contained in the annex;
			16.	Encourage the Least Developed Countries Expert Group to prioritize the implementation of the elements of its mandate in accordance with the needs of the least developed countries and the availability of resources;
			17.	Invite Parties and relevant organizations to continue to provide resources to support implementation of the work programme of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group.
		
			(i)	
	Annex
		Rules of procedure of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group
			I.	Scope
				1.	These rules of procedure shall apply to the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG) in conjunction with 5/CP.7, 29/CP.7, 7/CP.9, 4/CP.10, 4/CP.11, 8/CP.13, 6/CP.16, 5/CP.17, 12/CP.18, 3/CP.20, 1/CP.21, 19/CP.21, 16/CP.24, 7/CP.25, 11/CMA.1, 19/CMA.1 and 15/CP.26, as well as any other relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of Parties to the Paris Agreement.
			II.	Definition of terms
				2.	For the purpose of these rules of procedure, the following terms and definitions shall be used:
					(a)	“Convention” means the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change;
					(b)	“Chair” means the member of the LEG elected as Chair of the LEG;
					(c)	“Vice-Chair” means the member of the LEG elected as Vice-Chair of the LEG;
					(d)	“Rapporteur” means the member of the LEG elected as Rapporteur of the LEG;
					(e)	“Secretariat” means the secretariat referred to in Article 8 of the Convention;
					(f)	“Meeting” means the meeting of the LEG;
					(g)	“Observer” means any entity the LEG may invite to its meetings.
			III.	Membership, term limits, nomination and rotation of members
				3.	Pursuant to decision 29/CP.7 and as amended by decision 15/CP.26, paragraph 18, taking into account the goal of gender balance pursuant to decision 23/CP.18, the LEG shall comprise 17 experts, who shall serve in their individual expert capacity and shall be nominated by regional groups and constituencies. The composition of the LEG shall be as follows:
					(a)	Five members from African States that are least developed countries (LDCs);
					(b)	Two members from Asia-Pacific States that are LDCs;
					(c)	Two members from small island developing States that are LDCs;
					(d)	Four members from the LDC Parties;
					(e)	Four members from developed country Parties.
				4.	When nominating members to the LEG, regional groups and constituencies shall take into account, inter alia, expertise in climate change adaptation and support; engagement of youth; experience in climate finance; expertise in project design and implementation, indigenous and traditional knowledge, and education; and gender with a view to ensuring gender balance.
				5.	Regional groups and constituencies represented on the LEG are encouraged to accommodate the needs of members that would require extended temporary absence from service due to sickness, parental leave and commitments that cannot be avoided, by nominating a temporary replacement to serve during a member’s term of office, before the return of the member to full service.
				6.	The nominated temporary replacement referred to in paragraph 5 above shall serve within the bounds of the remaining term of the member for a period of no more than 12 months.
				7.	Members shall serve for a term of three years and shall be eligible to serve a maximum of two consecutive terms of office.
				8.	Members shall remain in office for the duration of their term, unless replaced by Parties in their respective groups or constituencies in accordance with paragraphs 5 above and 11 below.
				9.	The term of office of a member shall start on 1 January unless, in cases where a member is replaced before the end of their term, the term shall start from the time of the replacement member’s nomination by the nominating group or constituency.
				10.	In case of any vacancy in the LEG owing to the resignation of a member or the non-completion of a member’s assigned term of office, including for the reasons indicated in paragraph 5 above, the LEG, through the secretariat, shall request the respective group or constituency to select another member from the same group or constituency for nomination.
				11.	If a member is unable to participate in two consecutive meetings of the LEG or is unable to undertake the functions and tasks set out by the Chair for circumstances beyond those referred to in paragraph 5 above, and that member has not communicated a reason for their absence to the Chair or the secretariat, the Chair shall bring the matter to the attention of the LEG and shall seek clarification from the group or constituency that nominated the member on the status of their membership.
				12.	Members shall serve in their individual expert capacity and shall have no pecuniary or financial interest in the issues under consideration by the LEG.
			IV.	Election of officers and their functions
				13.	The LEG shall elect annually the following officers from among its LDC members:
					(a)	A Chair;
					(b)	A Vice-Chair;
					(c)	An anglophone Rapporteur;
					(d)	A francophone Rapporteur;
					(e)	A lusophone Rapporteur.
				14.	The officers shall be elected to serve for a term of two years.
				15.	To the extent possible, the Chair and the Vice-Chair should be from different United Nations regional groups. Gender balance should also be taken into account when nominating the Chair and the Vice-Chair.
				16.	The Chair and the Vice-Chair shall be elected by the majority of LDC members present and voting.
				17.	The Chair shall perform the following functions:
					(a)	Attending meetings of and reporting to the subsidiary bodies and to the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of Parties to the Paris Agreement, as appropriate;
					(b)	Chairing and facilitating the meetings of the LEG;
					(c)	Delegating tasks to LEG members and ensuring that members fulfil their commitments within specified time frames;
					(d)	Liaising with the Chair of the LDC Group under the UNFCCC and ensuring strategic engagement with the LDCs;
					(e)	Representing the LEG when conducting various outreach activities.
				18.	The Vice-Chair shall represent the Chair in their absence and shall perform the functions listed in paragraph 17 above, as appropriate.
				19.	The anglophone Rapporteur shall have the following functions:
					(a)	Liaising with anglophone LDC Parties;
					(b)	Keeping records in English of meetings of the LEG.
				20.	The francophone Rapporteur shall have the following functions:
					(a)	Liaising with francophone LDC Parties;
					(b)	Keeping records of meetings of the LEG in French.
				21.	The lusophone Rapporteur shall have the following functions:
					(a)	Liaising with lusophone LDC Parties;
					(b)	Keeping records of meetings of the LEG in Portuguese.
				22.	If both the Chair and the Vice-Chair are absent from a particular meeting, any other LDC member designated by the LEG members present shall temporarily serve as Chair of that meeting.
				23.	If the Chair or the Vice-Chair is unable to complete the assigned term of office, the LEG shall elect a replacement from among the LDC members to complete that term of office.
				24.	The Chair or any member designated by the LEG shall represent the LEG at external meetings and shall report back to the LEG on those meetings.
				25.	The LEG may further define additional roles and responsibilities for the Chair, the Vice-Chair and the Rapporteurs.
				26.	The Chair, the Vice-Chair and the Rapporteurs, in the exercise of their functions, shall remain under the authority of the LEG.
			V.	Conflict of interest and confidentiality
				27.	Members shall promptly disclose and recuse themselves from any deliberations or decision-making where their personal or financial interests may be affected in order to avoid a conflict of interest or the appearance of one.
				28.	Members shall not disclose any confidential information they receive in the course of their duties, even after their term of office as a member has expired.
			VI.	Establishment and oversight of thematic working groups
				29.	Pursuant to decision 15/CP.26, paragraph 9, the LEG may decide to establish subcommittees, thematic working groups or task-focused ad hoc working groups to provide expert advice to assist the LEG in implementing its work programme, as appropriate, and shall report to the LEG on work undertaken.
				30.	In establishing any subcommittees, thematic working groups or task-focused ad hoc working groups, the LEG shall determine an appropriate number of members and ensure that members have relevant expertise in the respective field of work.
			VII.	Frequency, modalities and location of meetings
				31.	The LEG shall meet at least twice a year, while retaining flexibility to adjust the number of meetings, as appropriate.
				32.	The first meeting of the LEG shall be held no later than in March and the second meeting shall be held no later than in September to allow sufficient time for the meeting reports to be submitted and translated into the official languages of the United Nations in time for the relevant sessions of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation.
				33.	A quorum of 50 per cent plus one member of the members of the LEG shall be obtained for any decisions to be made at a meeting.
				34.	Virtual participation shall be made possible for LEG members who are unable to join an in-person meeting.
				35.	Meetings of the LEG shall take place in an LDC, unless otherwise decided by the LEG and subject to the necessary arrangements being made by the secretariat in consultation with the Chair.
				36.	The Chair, in consultation with the members, shall guide the secretariat on the agenda items that shall be open for participation by resource persons and observers.
				37.	The LEG shall decide on whether to webcast its meetings or part of them through the UNFCCC website should technical and financial resources permit.
			VIII.	Development of and reporting on the two-year rolling work programme
				38.	The LEG shall develop a two-year rolling work programme at its first meeting of each year for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its first session of each year.
				39.	The LEG shall report on its work to the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at each of its sessions.
			IX.	Agenda and documents for meetings
				40.	The Chair, assisted by the secretariat, shall prepare the provisional agenda for each meeting of the LEG.
				41.	Members may propose additions or changes to the provisional agenda in writing to the secretariat within one week of receiving the provisional agenda. Any additions or changes shall be included in a revised provisional agenda prepared by the secretariat in consultation with the Chair.
				42.	The secretariat shall transmit the provisional annotated agenda for each meeting to members of the LEG at least four weeks prior to that meeting.
				43.	The LEG shall adopt the meeting agenda at the beginning of each meeting.
				44.	Documents for the meeting shall be decided by the Chair and the Vice-Chair with the assistance of the secretariat.
				45.	The documents referred to in paragraph 44 above shall be made available to LEG members at least two weeks before the meeting.
				46.	The Chair, in consultation with LEG members, shall advise the secretariat on the documents that shall be made public at least two weeks before the meeting.
				47.	The secretariat, in consultation with the Chair, shall prepare a draft report on the meeting, to be made available, to the extent possible, to members for comment at least three days before it is submitted for publication.
				48.	The decisions and outputs of the LEG shall be made available on the UNFCCC website unless otherwise decided by the LEG.
			X.	Decision-making
				49.	Decisions of the LEG shall be taken by consensus.
			XI.	Participation of observers and non-members in meetings
				50.	The meetings of the LEG may be open to attendance by observers.
				51.	The LEG may invite experts as resource persons to contribute to specific technical work at its meetings.
				52.	The LEG may invite and fund, subject to the availability of resources, LDC Party representatives to take part in LEG meetings and contribute to the discussions.
				53.	The LEG shall invite interested organizations and individuals to actively participate in its work, including through any subcommittees, thematic working groups or task-focused ad hoc working groups the LEG may establish or in specific activities, such as designing and organizing events and producing technical materials.
			XII.	Means of communication
				54.	English shall be the working language of the LEG.
				55.	The LEG, in conducting its activities, shall facilitate translation into official languages of the United Nations relevant to the LDCs, to the extent possible.
				56.	The LEG may use electronic means of communication to facilitate its work and to take decisions in accordance with guidelines to be agreed by the LEG.
			XIII.	Collaboration with other constituted bodies and entities under the Convention and the Paris Agreement
				57.	The LEG shall invite the secretariats of the Green Climate Fund, the Global Environment Facility and the Adaptation Fund to its meetings to discuss collaboration in supporting the LDCs.
				58.	The LEG shall collaborate with other constituted bodies and entities under the Convention and the Paris Agreement working on adaptation and means of implementation, as well as on work under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, in providing support to the LDCs.
			XIV.	Engagement of other organizations and regional centres and networks
				59.	The LEG may invite relevant regional centres to nominate one focal point each for the LEG with a view to enhancing collaboration with those centres.
				60.	The LEG may invite representatives of global programmes, projects and networks that support the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans to its meetings, as appropriate, as a way of promoting the exchange of experience and lessons learned.
			XV.	Authority of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
				61.	In the event of any conflict between any provisions of these rules of procedure and any provisions of the Convention and the Paris Agreement, the Convention and the Paris Agreement shall prevail.
			XVI.	Amendments to the rules of procedure
				62.	These rules of procedure may be amended as requested by the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement.
				10th plenary meeting
				20 November 2022
					
