|  | United Nations | FCCC/PA/CMA/2024/17/Add.3 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 27 March 2025  Original: English |

Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting 
of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
Report of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement on its 
sixth session, held in Baku from 11 to 24 November 2024
	Addendum
	Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its sixth session
	Contents
Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its sixth session
	Decision	Page
		16/CMA.6	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate 
Change Impacts and joint annual report of its Executive Committee and the 
Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage
associated with the adverse effects of climate change		2
		17/CMA.6	Enhancing climate technology development and transfer to support implementation
of the Paris Agreement		9
		18/CMA.6	Technology implementation programme		10
		19/CMA.6	Second review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building		11
		20/CMA.6	Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building
for 2024		15
		21/CMA.6	Provision of financial and technical support to developing country Parties for
reporting and capacity-building		17
		22/CMA.6	Matters relating to the impacts of the implementation of response measures		20
		23/CMA.6	Matters relating to the committee to facilitate implementation and promote
compliance referred to in Article 15, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement		27
	Resolution
		1/CMA.6	Expression of gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Azerbaijan
and the people of the city of Baku		28
	
Decision 16/CMA.6
Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts and joint annual report of its Executive Committee and the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
	1.	Welcomes the progress of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts in implementing its rolling workplan for 2023–2027 and the progress of the Advisory Board and the interim secretariat of the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change in operationalizing the Santiago network;
	2.	Adopts the rules of procedure of the Advisory Board of the Santiago network, as contained in the annex;
	3.	Expresses appreciation to the organizations, constituted bodies under the Convention and the Paris Agreement and other stakeholders that have contributed to the implementation of the rolling workplan of the Executive Committee for 2023–2027, including through its thematic expert groups, and to the organizations, bodies, networks and experts that have become or expressed an interest in becoming members of the Santiago network;
	4.	Requests the subsidiary bodies to continue consideration of the 2024 joint annual report of the Executive Committee and the Santiago network and the 2024 review of the Warsaw International Mechanism at their sixty-second sessions (June 2025) with a view to recommending a draft decision or decisions thereon for consideration and adoption by the governing body or bodies at the session(s) to be held in November 2025;
	5.	Notes that considerations related to the governance of the Warsaw International Mechanism will continue at its seventh session (November 2025).
I.	
Annex
	Rules of procedure of the Advisory Board of the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change*
	I.	Scope
		1.	These rules and procedures shall apply to the Advisory Board of the Santiago network (the “Advisory Board”) in accordance with decision 12/CMA.4, endorsed by decision 11/CP.27, and decision 6/CMA.5, endorsed by decision 2/CP.28, as well as any other relevant decisions of the governing body or bodies.
	II.	Definitions
		2.	For the purpose of these rules:
			(a)	“Co-chairs” means the members of the Santiago network elected as co-chairs of the Advisory Board of the Santiago network;
			(b)	“Secretariat” means the secretariat referred to in paragraph 3(a) of decision 12/CMA.4, endorsed by decision 11/CP.27, as a hosted secretariat, and also in the Terms of Reference of the Santiago network, in Annex I of the same decisions.
	III.	Membership
		3.	The Advisory Board, with the aim of achieving fair and balanced representation, shall be composed of the following, taking into account the need for gender balance:
			(a)	Two members from each of the five recognized United Nations regional groups;
			(b)	One member each from the least developed countries and small island developing States;
			(c)	Two members of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism (ExCom), nominated by the ExCom from among its members.
		4.	The Advisory Board will also have three other representatives, one from the Women and Gender constituency, one from Indigenous Peoples organizations, and one from the children and youth non-governmental organizations, who may actively participate in the deliberations of the Advisory Board.
		5.	Members and representatives elected to the Advisory Board shall serve a term of two years and shall be eligible to serve a maximum of two consecutive terms of office.
		6.	Half of the members elected in 2023 shall serve a term of three years and half of the members shall serve a term of two years, after which time the governing body or bodies shall elect half of the members every year for a term of two years.
		7.	The members of the Advisory Board shall remain in office until their successors are elected.
		8.	The term of office of a member shall start at the first meeting of the Advisory Board in the calendar year following their election and shall end immediately before the first meeting of the Advisory Board in the calendar year in which their term ends.
		9.	If a member or representative of the Advisory Board resigns or is otherwise unable to complete their term, the regional group or constituency from which the member comes - or the ExCom, for members nominated by it - may decide, bearing in mind the proximity of the next session of the governing body or bodies, to appoint another member from the same group or constituency to replace said member for the remainder of that member’s term, in which case the appointment shall count as one term.
		10.	If a member is temporarily unable to serve in the Advisory Board, the Advisory Board shall, at the request of that member, invite the group, constituency, or the ExCom, to replace said member in an ad interim capacity for a period of up to one year from the date of that request.
	IV.	Conflicts of interest and confidentiality
		11.	Advisory Board members must promptly disclose and recuse themselves from any deliberations or decision-making where their personal or financial interests may be affected, in order to avoid a conflict of interest or the appearance of one.
		12.	Advisory Board members should not disclose any confidential information they receive in the course of their duties, even after leaving the Advisory Board, except as required by national law.
	V.	Chairing arrangements
		13.	The Advisory Board shall elect annually two co-chairs from among its members to serve for a term of one year.
		14.	If one or both co-chairs are absent from a particular meeting, any other member or members designated by the Advisory Board shall serve as co-chair or co-chairs.
		15.	If a co-chair is unable to complete the term of office, the Advisory Board shall elect a replacement to complete that term of office.
		16.	The co-chairs shall collaborate in chairing meetings of the Advisory Board and related intersessional work. The co-chairs shall, inter alia, declare the opening and closing of meetings, ensure the observance of these rules of procedure, accord the right to speak and announce decisions. The co-chairs shall rule on points of order and, subject to these rules of procedure, shall have complete control over the proceedings of meetings and the maintenance of order at meetings.
		17.	The co-chairs shall share and allocate between themselves responsibility for chairing Advisory Board meetings.
		18.	The co-chairs or any member designated by the Advisory Board shall report to the governing body or bodies on behalf of the Advisory Board.
		19.	The co-chairs or any member designated by the Advisory Board shall represent the Advisory Board in external meetings and shall report back to the Advisory Board on those meetings.
		20.	The co-chairs may also jointly delegate tasks to members of the Advisory Board in the interest of expediting and advancing the work of the Advisory Board.
		21.	The Advisory Board may further define additional roles and responsibilities for the co-chairs.
		22.	The co-chairs, in the exercise of their functions, remain under the authority of the Advisory Board.
	VI.	Subcommittees and panels
		23.	The Advisory Board may establish subcommittees, panels, working groups or task forces, if required, to undertake specific tasks assigned by the Advisory Board or to provide expert advice in order to assist the Advisory Board in executing its work.
		24.	In establishing subcommittees, panels, working groups or task forces, the Advisory Board will determine an appropriate number of participants and ensure that participants have appropriate expertise in the relevant field of work.
	VII.	Secretariat
		25.	The director of the Santiago network secretariat shall serve as secretary to the Advisory Board.
		26.	The secretary shall be responsible for facilitating and providing support to the:
			(a)	Making of the necessary arrangements for the meetings of the Advisory Board, including announcing meetings, issuing invitations and making available the documents for meetings;
			(b)	Maintaining of meeting records and arranging for the storage and preservation of documents of meetings;
			(c)	Making of documents of the meetings of the Advisory Board available to the public, unless otherwise determined by the Advisory Board.
			(d)	Tracking of the implementation of decisions and actions taken by the Advisory Board and report on the progress of these actions.
		27.	In addition, the secretary shall facilitate support that the Advisory Board may require or that the governing body or bodies may direct with respect to the Advisory Board
	VIII.	Meetings
		28.	The Advisory Board shall meet at least twice a year, where possible in connection with meetings of the ExCom, while retaining its flexibility to adjust the number of meetings to suit its needs.
		29.	The Advisory Board shall hold its meetings at the location of the Santiago network secretariat head office, unless otherwise decided by the Advisory Board and subject to the necessary arrangements being made, and may hold meetings in hybrid (in person and virtual) format. Decisions on the location of meetings other than the location of the Santiago network secretariat shall take into account the costs and benefits of venue rotation, particularly in developing countries and with respect to facilitating the participation of key stakeholders, as well as the location of the ExCom meetings.
		30.	The Advisory Board may decide to hold meetings virtually on an exceptional basis and when required to advance its work, as proposed by the co-chairs after consultation with the Advisory Board.
		31.	In arranging virtual meetings, the Advisory Board shall consider the working modalities of such meetings, including the fair and balanced choice of timing in light of the time zones of members, with the aim of ensuring inclusive and effective participation of all members.
		32.	At the first Advisory Board meeting of each calendar year, the co-chairs shall propose a schedule of meetings for that calendar year.
		33.	At each meeting, the Advisory Board will confirm the dates, duration and venue of the following meeting.
		34.	If changes to the scheduled or additional meetings are required, the co-chairs shall, after consultation with the Advisory Board, request the secretariat to give notice of any changes in the dates of scheduled meetings and/or of the dates of additional meetings to members and representatives, and observers. To the extent possible, notice of a meeting shall be given at least four weeks before the opening of that meeting.
	IX.	Quorum
		35.	At least 10 of the Advisory Board members, as laid out in paragraph 3, must be present at a meeting to constitute a quorum. Members participating in meetings virtually will count towards quorum. A quorum shall be established prior to the commencement of each meeting.
		36.	A quorum shall be confirmed by the co-chairs immediately prior to the adoption of any decision by the Advisory Board.
		37.	A member may ask for a confirmation of quorum prior to the commencement of a meeting or prior to the adoption of any decision by the Advisory Board.
	X.	Agenda and documentation for meetings
		38.	The co-chairs, assisted by the secretariat, shall prepare the provisional agenda for each meeting as well as a draft report on the meeting.
		39.	Members and representatives may propose additions or changes to the provisional agenda, in writing, to the secretariat within one week of receiving the provisional agenda, and these additions or changes shall be included in a revised provisional agenda prepared by the secretariat with the approval of the co-chairs.
		40.	The secretariat shall transmit the revised provisional agenda for a meeting to the members and representatives of the Advisory Board at least four weeks prior to that meeting. The revised provisional agenda may be transmitted after that date with the approval of the co-chairs.
		41.	Unless otherwise decided by the co-chairs, documents for a meeting of the Advisory Board should be published on the Santiago network website at least two weeks prior to that meeting, to the extent possible.
		42.	The Advisory Board shall, at the beginning of each meeting, adopt the meeting agenda.
		43.	Before the end of each meeting, the co-chairs shall present draft decisions for consideration and approval by the Advisory Board.
	XI.	Decision-making
		44.	Decisions of the Advisory Board will be taken by consensus by its members as laid out in paragraph 3.
		45.	Efforts by the co-chairs to facilitate the reaching of consensus may include:
			(a)	Consulting with members on draft documents, including draft decisions, prior to the meeting;
			(b)	Consulting with members on the relevant matter during the meeting;
			(c)	Providing the opportunity for members to state and/or formally record in the report on the relevant meeting their reservations regarding a particular decision without preventing consensus from being reached.
			(d)	Postponing the decision on the matter to a later meeting in order to allow for further exchange on the matter;
		46.	If all efforts at reaching consensus have been exhausted, and no consensus is reached, decisions will be taken by a four-fifths majority of the members present and voting.
		47.	The co-chairs, acting together and in good faith, and following consultations with all members, shall determine whether all efforts at reaching consensus in respect of a particular draft decision have been exhausted.
		48.	In making such a determination the co-chairs shall take into consideration:
			(a)	Whether consultations on the relevant matter have occurred during and/or between meetings, including between the co-chairs, without consensus being reached;
			(b)	Whether the subject matter of the draft decision has been considered at prior meetings without consensus being reached;
			(c)	Whether and how many members have indicated that they cannot join consensus on a decision.
		49.	Each member shall have one vote. For the purpose of this rule, “members present and voting” means members participating in the meeting (both in person and virtually) at which voting takes place and casting an affirmative or negative vote. Members abstaining from voting shall be considered as not voting for the purpose of determining the four-fifths majority.
	XII.	Process for intersessional decision making:
		50.	The Advisory Board may take a decision without meeting on an extraordinary basis when, in the judgment of both co-chairs, such a decision should not be postponed to the next Advisory Board meeting. In such a case, the secretariat, with the approval of the co-chairs, shall transmit to Board members a proposed decision with the invitation to approve the decision on a non-objection basis for a prescribed period (generally 21 days but in urgent cases no less than one week). Copies of such a proposal shall be provided to the representatives for their information.
		51.	The provisions on quorum and other rules set forth in these rules of procedure shall apply mutatis mutandis to the aforementioned procedure.
		52.	In the absence of an objection by an Advisory Board member within the prescribed period, the decision will be deemed taken upon the expiration of the prescribed period. If an objection is received within the prescribed period, the co-chairs will work to resolve the concerns of the objecting Board member(s) directly. If the objecting Board member(s) uphold their objection following discussion with the co-chairs, the proposed decision will be considered by the Board at the following Advisory Board meeting. The secretariat shall circulate all written comments and objections to Advisory Board members and representatives and notify all members and representatives of the action taken pursuant to this paragraph.
		53.	Decisions approved between meetings shall be recorded in the report of the following Board meeting.
	XIII.	Use of electronic means of communication
		54.	The Advisory Board may use electronic means of communication to facilitate work and to take decisions in accordance with guidelines to be agreed by the Advisory Board. The secretariat shall ensure that a secure and dedicated web interface is established and maintained to facilitate the work of the Board.
	XIV.	Participation of observers in meetings
		55.	Advisory Board meetings will be open to observers, unless otherwise decided by the Advisory Board, and the Advisory Board will invite observers from relevant constituted bodies, civil society organizations and other organizations, bodies, networks and experts to attend its meetings in order to provide technical expertise and inputs, as appropriate, to the Advisory Board for its deliberations.
		56.	The Advisory Board may decide on additional procedures for the participation of observers.
	XV.	Transparency
		57.	The decisions and products of the Advisory Board shall be made publicly available on the Santiago network website unless decided otherwise by the Advisory Board.
	XVI.	Working language
		58.	English shall be the working language of the Advisory Board.
	XVII.	Modifications to the rules of procedure
		59.	Decisions to propose modifications to these rules of procedure, except with respect to matters decided in decision 12/CMA.4, may be taken by the Advisory Board by consensus with a view to recommending them to the governing body or bodies through the subsidiary bodies for consideration and adoption.
		11th plenary meeting
		23 November 2024
	
	I.	
	Decision 17/CMA.6
	Enhancing climate technology development and transfer to support implementation of the Paris Agreement
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling Article 10 of the Paris Agreement,
			Also recalling decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 66 and 68, and decisions 15/CMA.1, 8/CMA.2, 15/CMA.3, 19/CMA.4 and 14/CMA.5,
			1.	Welcomes with appreciation the efforts of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network in implementing the joint work programme of the Technology Mechanism for 2023–2027 and acknowledges the progress made in executing their respective programmes and plans;
			2.	Welcomes with appreciation the enhanced collaboration and coordination between the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network, including their organization of joint events and systematic exchange of feedback on one another’s work in undertaking activities under their joint work programme for 2023–2027, and encourages them to continue collaboration to maximize the impacts of their work;
			3.	Affirms paragraphs 3–5 of decision 10/CP.29;
			4.	Decides to participate in conducting a review of the functions and in deciding whether to extend the term of the Climate Technology Centre at its seventh session (November 2025), taking into account the findings of the first and second independent reviews of the effective implementation of the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the findings of the first periodic assessment of the effectiveness and adequacy of the support provided to the bodies of the Technology Mechanism in supporting implementation of the Paris Agreement on matters relating to technology development and transfer;
			5.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to initiate, at its sixty-second session (June 2025), the review referred to in paragraph ‎4 above with a view to recommending a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its seventh session.
		5th plenary meeting
		18 November 2024
	I.	
	Decision 18/CMA.6
		Technology implementation programme
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
			1.	Decides to launch a process for elaborating the technology implementation programme;
			2.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to consider this matter at its sixty‑second session (June 2025) based on the results of Parties’ deliberations thereon at this session, as contained in the draft text available on the UNFCCC website, while recognizing that the draft text does not represent consensus among Parties, with a view to recommending a draft decision for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its seventh session (November 2025) with a view to informing and further elaborating the technology implementation programme.
			11th plenary meeting
			23 November 2024
	
	I.	
	Decision 19/CMA.6
	Second review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling decisions 3/CMA.2 and 16/CMA.5,
		1.	Recalls that the Paris Committee on Capacity-building was established in decision 1/CP.21 with the aim of addressing gaps and needs, both current and emerging, in implementing capacity-building in developing country Parties and further enhancing capacity-building efforts, including with regard to coherence and coordination of capacity-building activities under the Convention;
		2.	Welcomes the annual technical progress reports of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building for 2020, 2021, 2022 and 2023 and takes note of the recommendations contained therein;
		3.	Reaffirms the need to further promote efficiencies and avoid duplication of efforts in the implementation of capacity-building activities under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement;
		4.	Welcomes the synthesis report on the second review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building;
		5.	Recognizes that the following priority areas determined in the first review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building have helped to focus and guide the work of the Committee, thereby avoiding duplication of efforts in the implementation of capacity-building activities and providing guidance on its operations, planning and implementation of work, and reporting:
			(a)	Enhancing coherence and coordination of capacity-building under the Convention with a focus on avoiding duplication of efforts, including through collaboration with bodies under and outside the Convention that engage in activities related to capacity- building, as appropriate and in accordance with their respective mandates;
			(b)	Identifying capacity gaps and needs, both current and emerging, and recommending ways to address them;
			(c)	Promoting awareness-raising, knowledge- and information-sharing and stakeholder engagement with bodies and relevant actors under and outside the Convention, as appropriate and in accordance with their respective mandates;
		6.	Welcomes the progress of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building in implementing its workplan for 2021–2024 in accordance with its priority areas;
		7.	Also welcomes the activities undertaken under the priority areas referred to in paragraph 5 above, including the work under the informal coordination group for capacity-building under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, such as the publication of its six e‑booklets; the PCCB Network; and the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th Capacity-building Hubs; and the work relating to the PCCB toolkit for assessing capacity gaps and needs in implementing the Paris Agreement;
		8.	Decides that the work of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building shall be guided by the priority areas set out in the annex;
		9.	Also decides that, going forward and subject to the availability of resources, the Paris Committee on Capacity-building shall conduct the activities set out in the annex in accordance with the priority areas referred to therein;
		10.	Further decides that the Paris Committee on Capacity-building shall work on any additional activities that may be assigned to it by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement within its mandate, subject to the availability of resources;
		11.	Decides to extend the Paris Committee on Capacity-building for five years and to review its progress and need for extension at the eleventh session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (November 2029);
		12.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to initiate at its sixty-eighth session (June 2028) the preparation of the terms of reference for the third review of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building with a view to recommending a draft decision for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its tenth session (November 2028);
		13.	Also requests the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, at its 9th meeting, to develop a workplan for the period of its extension on the basis of the priority areas and activities set out in the annex for consideration by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its seventh session (November 2025);
		14.	Further requests that the workplan referred to in paragraph ‎13 above include core elements such as priority areas, activities, deliverables, timelines and expected results in relation to the priority areas referred to in the annex;
		15.	Requests the Paris Committee on Capacity-building to report on the expected work under its workplan and on the progress, outcomes, impacts and effectiveness of the activities in its workplan in its annual technical progress report;
		16.	Also requests the Paris Committee on Capacity-building to extend its current workplan until a new workplan is agreed;
		17.	Invites Parties and relevant institutions, as appropriate, to provide support and resources to the Paris Committee on Capacity-building for implementing its workplan in the light of the aim of the Committee.
	I.	
	Annex
	Priority areas and activities of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building
		1.	Priority area (a): enhancing coherence and coordination of capacity-building under the Convention and the Paris Agreement with a focus on avoiding duplication of efforts, including through collaboration with bodies under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement that engage in activities related to capacity-building, as appropriate and in accordance with their respective mandates:
			(a)	Collating and reviewing current and planned capacity-building work of constituted bodies established under the Convention and the Paris Agreement that implement capacity-building activities in order to provide an overview of capacity-building activities, particularly by regularly convening meetings of the informal coordination group for capacity-building under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, and regularly sharing this information with the constituted bodies;
			(b)	Providing recommendations to Parties on how to improve coherence and coordination of capacity-building and avoid duplication of efforts;
			(c)	Liaising and engaging with bodies under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement that are engaged in implementing capacity-building activities, particularly by coordinating the PCCB Network of interested stakeholders engaged in climate-related capacity-building, with a view to sharing information on good practices, connecting experts and peers across sectors and regions, and contributing to the work of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building in fulfilling its mandate.
		2.	Priority area (b): identifying capacity gaps and needs, both current and emerging, and recommending ways to address them:
			(a)	Interacting with other constituted bodies, particularly through the informal coordination group for capacity-building under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, to allow the Paris Committee on Capacity-building to gather information on what they are doing to address capacity gaps and needs in areas relevant to their mandates to provide input to their work, as appropriate;
			(b)	Continuing efforts to gather and promote the development and dissemination of tools and methodologies for implementing capacity-building activities, in particular through the capacity-building portal;
			(c)	Collating, reviewing and sharing information on experience, good practices and lessons learned related to enhancing the ownership of developing countries of building and maintaining capacity, and providing recommendations in this regard.
		3.	Priority area (c): promoting awareness-raising, knowledge- and information-sharing and stakeholder engagement with bodies and relevant actors under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement, as appropriate and in accordance with their respective mandates:
			(a)	Collecting information from relevant sources, including the Durban Forum and the informal coordination group for capacity-building under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, on good practices, experience and lessons learned related to capacity-building, and disseminating this information, including via the capacity-building portal, with the aim of addressing gaps and needs related to implementing capacity-building;
			(b)	Providing recommendations to Parties on:
				(i)	Enhancing the sharing of good practices, experience and lessons learned related to capacity-building among relevant bodies under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement, as appropriate and in accordance with their respective mandates;
				(ii)	Potential areas of collaborative work with those bodies whose work is relevant to the Paris Committee on Capacity-building and its workplan, as appropriate and in accordance within their respective mandates;
				(iii)	How information from the Durban Forum can be utilized by bodies under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement;
			(c)	Organizing the annual Capacity-building Hub held at the sessions of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement;
			(d)	Promoting strategic stakeholder engagement through, inter alia, targeted outreach activities as set out in the workplan to foster exchange on capacity-building at the national and regional level, including through regional climate weeks, as appropriate, and subject to the availability of resources.
				5th plenary meeting
				18 November 2024
		
		I.	
		Decision 20/CMA.6
		Annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building for 2024
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
			Recalling decisions 3/CMA.2, 18/CMA.3, 21/CMA.4 and 15/CMA.5,
			1.	Takes note of decision 19/CMA.6;
			2.	Welcomes the annual technical progress report of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building for 2024 and takes note of the recommendations therein;
			3.	Invites Parties, as appropriate, the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, the constituted bodies under the Paris Agreement, United Nations organizations, observers and other stakeholders to consider the recommendations referred to in paragraph 1 above and to take any necessary action, as appropriate and in accordance with their mandates;
			4.	Acknowledges the progress of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building in delivering on its mandate to address gaps and needs, both current and emerging, in implementing capacity-building in developing country Parties and further enhancing capacity-building efforts;
			5.	Also acknowledges the work of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building in relation to enhancing coherence and coordination of capacity-building activities under the Paris Agreement, including its collaboration with other constituted bodies and stakeholders in this regard;
			6.	Welcomes the completion of the activities under the workplan of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building for 2021–2024, which is based on the priority areas and activities set out in the annex to decision 9/CP.25;
			7.	Also welcomes the continued collaboration of the Paris Committee on Capacity‑building with Parties and non-Party stakeholders on capacity-building for climate action, as well as on addressing cross-cutting matters, including those related to human rights, gender-responsiveness, youth, Action for Climate Empowerment, Indigenous Peoples’ knowledge and local communities, such as through the PCCB Network, the informal coordination group for capacity-building under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, the Durban Forum on capacity-building, the Capacity-building Hub and social media outreach;
			8.	Further welcomes the progress of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building in identifying current activities for enhancing the capacity of developing countries to prepare and implement nationally determined contributions;
			9.	Acknowledges the contribution of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building to the organization of the 6th Capacity-building Hub, which took place in conjunction with this session as a crucial platform for enabling effective climate action, bringing together stakeholders and facilitating collaboration, knowledge exchange and peer-to-peer learning with a view to addressing developing country capacity gaps and needs, and requests the secretariat, under the guidance of the Committee, to organize the 7th Capacity-building Hub, to be held at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in November 2025;
			10.	Takes note of the 2025 focus area of the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, namely capacity-building for designing holistic investment strategies, bankable projects and stakeholder engagement aimed at strengthening the implementation of nationally determined contributions and national adaptation plans in developing countries, as agreed on by the Committee intersessionally based on inputs received at its 8th meeting;
			11.	Emphasizes that capacity gaps and needs pertaining to implementing the Paris Agreement still exist in developing countries and recalls Article 11, paragraph 3, of the Paris Agreement, which states that all Parties should cooperate to enhance the capacity of developing country Parties to implement this Agreement and that developed country Parties should enhance support for capacity-building actions in developing country Parties;
				12.	Invites Parties and relevant institutions, as appropriate, to provide support and resources to the Paris Committee on Capacity-building for implementing its workplan for the period of its extension, once the workplan is developed and considered, in accordance with decision 19/CMA.6, in the light of the aim of the Committee established in decision 1/CP.21;
				13.	Also invites the Paris Committee on Capacity-building to include in its annual report information on how it has integrated, in line with its mandate, relevant outcomes from the global stocktake, as set out in decision 1/CMA.5, in particular paragraphs 111–120;
			14.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
			5th plenary meeting
			18 November 2024
		
		I.	
		Decision 21/CMA.6
		Provision of financial and technical support to developing country Parties for reporting and capacity-building
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
			Recalling decisions 18/CMA.1, 5/CMA.3, 17/CMA.4 and 18/CMA.5,
			Also recalling Article 13, in particular paragraph 14, of the Paris Agreement, which states that support shall be provided to developing countries for the implementation of that Article,
			Further recalling Article 13, in particular paragraph 15, of the Paris Agreement, which states that support shall also be provided for the building of transparency-related capacity of developing country Parties on a continuous basis,
			Recognizing the special circumstances of the least developed countries and small island developing States, as recognized in Article 13, paragraph 3, of the Paris Agreement,
			Emphasizing that the development and improvement of sustainable institutional capacity, including enhanced reporting systems of developing country Parties, are crucial for the full implementation of the enhanced transparency framework under the Paris Agreement,
			1.	Acknowledges the existing financial, technical and capacity-building support for developing country Parties to address challenges in implementing the enhanced transparency framework that is available through bilateral, multilateral and other channels;
			2.	Welcomes, in particular, the support provided by the Global Environment Facility and its implementing agencies for the implementation of the enhanced transparency framework, including through the joint programme of the Capacity-building Initiative for Transparency and the Global Support Programme;
			3.	Also welcomes the information provided by the Global Environment Facility in its report to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-ninth session and its addendum on financial support requested, approved and provided for the preparation of biennial transparency reports by developing country Parties;
			4.	Expresses appreciation for and welcomes the efforts of the Presidency of the twenty-ninth session of the Conference of the Parties in organizing, in collaboration with the secretariat and other partners, several high-level forums and technical and capacity-building workshops on climate transparency, held before and during the twenty-ninth session of the Conference of the Parties, namely on the enhanced transparency framework and the preparation of Parties’ first biennial transparency reports, under the Baku Global Climate Transparency Platform, launched in September 2024;
			5.	Acknowledges that developing country Parties continue to be supported, upon their request, under the Capacity-building Initiative for Transparency in building their institutional and technical capacity for implementing the enhanced transparency framework and emphasizes the importance of the continued provision of support for building the transparency-related capacity of developing country Parties on a continuous basis;
			6.	Welcomes the efforts of the secretariat in delivering capacity-building for the implementation of the enhanced transparency framework, in particular through regional online and in-person workshops, and encourages the secretariat to tailor these capacity-building activities to subregions that share similar conditions and challenges with a view to maximizing their impact and enhancing the balance and inclusivity of these activities across the subregions;
			7.	Acknowledges the progress of the Global Environment Facility in streamlining the process that enables Parties to access resources for preparing their biennial transparency reports, including by enabling them to access resources for two biennial transparency reports and/or one national communication as part of the same enabling activity and raising the threshold for expedited approvals;
			8.	Expresses appreciation to the secretariat for successfully implementing in 2024 the mandates contained in paragraphs 13–16 of decision 18/CMA.5;
			9.	Recalls that additional activities are planned for 2025 as referred to in paragraphs 17–‍19 of decision 18/CMA.5;
			10.	Welcomes the summary report on the facilitative dialogue held at the sixtieth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to share experience in gathering, analysing and managing data for climate reporting;
			11.	Acknowledges the key takeaways in the summary report referred to in paragraph 10 above, including the summary of best practices shared by Parties, and the recognition that developing country Parties require additional support on institutional arrangements, data management and capacity-building, as appropriate, to build their capacities in relation to gathering, analysing and managing data;
			12.	Welcomes the efforts of the secretariat to organize regular (online and in-person) technical training workshops for developing country Parties in order to facilitate an interactive exercise with experts from Parties to demonstrate the functions of the enhanced transparency framework reporting tools in fulfilment of the mandates contained in paragraphs 14 and 16 of decision 5/CMA.3, noting that in-person hands-on training is more effective in practice;
			13.	Emphasizes the importance of building the capacity of developing country Parties to transition from ad hoc reporting approaches to government-led, systematic and institutionalized processes for preparing and submitting national reports under the enhanced transparency framework;
			14.	Acknowledges that this transition is crucial for ensuring sustainability, ownership and alignment with national priorities, while addressing capacity gaps and challenges faced by developing country Parties in implementing the enhanced transparency framework;
			15.	Underscores the importance of the financial, technical and capacity-building support available through bilateral, multilateral and other channels for enhancing the capacity of developing country Parties to address the challenges and needs identified in the summary report referred to in paragraph 10 above and in the technical paper prepared by the Consultative Group of Experts for sustainable implementation of the enhanced transparency framework, including by establishing national reporting systems;
			16.	Requests the secretariat to organize a workshop in consultation with the Global Environment Facility and its implementing agencies, as applicable, to be held at the sixty‑second session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (June 2025), to facilitate the sharing of experiences of developing country Parties in preparing their first biennial transparency reports, including in accessing the funds received and their adequacy for the sustainability of the implementation of the enhanced transparency framework;
			17.	Also requests the secretariat to prepare a summary report on the workshop referred to in paragraph 16 above by no later than three weeks prior to the seventh session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (November 2025) for consideration at that session;
			18.	Underlines the importance of the secretariat having adequate financial resources available to provide technical support to developing country Parties for reporting under the enhanced transparency framework;
			19.	Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 16–17 above;
			20.	Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
			11th plenary meeting
			23 November 2024
		
		I.	
		Decision 22/CMA.6
	Matters relating to the impacts of the implementation of response measures
		The Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling Article 4 of the Convention,
		Also recalling Article 2 and Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol,
		Reaffirming Article 4, paragraph 15, of the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling decisions 1/CP.21, 7/CP.24, 4/CP.25, 19/CP.26, 20/CP.27, 13/CP.28, 3/CMP.14, 4/CMP.15, 7/CMP.16, 7/CMP.17, 4/CMP.18, 7/CMA.1, 4/CMA.2, 23/CMA.3, 23/CMA.4 and 19/CMA.5,
		Also recalling decision 1/CMA.5, paragraph 136, and decision 19/CMA.5, annex I, paragraph 1(f), which highlight the importance of promoting action to minimize the adverse impacts and maximize the positive impacts of the implementation of response measures,
		1.	Express appreciation to the Government of Ghana for hosting the first global dialogue on the impacts of the implementation of response measures, held from 9 to 10 September 2024 in Accra;
		2.	Also express appreciation to the United Nations Development Programme for supporting the organization of the global dialogue; the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies and the secretariat for organizing the dialogue; the experts and facilitators who contributed to the event; and the Parties and observers that participated;
		3.	Acknowledge the report on the global dialogue prepared by the secretariat, recognizing that it is not an exhaustive account thereof;
		4.	Welcome the annual report of the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures for 2024, adopt the updated rules of procedure contained therein and also adopt the recommendations forwarded by the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures contained in sections I–II below, which pertain to activities 6 and 10 of the workplan of the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts;
		5.	Further adopt the workplan of the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts for 2026–2030, as contained in the annex;
		6.	Request the Katowice Committee on Impacts to prepare and include in its annual report for 2025 a timeline and modalities for its implementation of each activity in the workplan referred to in paragraph 5 above;
		7.	Also request the forum to incorporate into its annual workplan the consideration of matters of process and substantive matters related to the work of the Katowice Committee on Impacts at the sessions of the governing bodies on the basis of the annual report of the Katowice Committee on Impacts;
		8.	Further request the secretariat to support the implementation of the workplan referred to in paragraph 5 above;
		9.	Take note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 5–8 above and 16 below;
		10.	Request that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources;
		I.	Activity 6 of the workplan
			11.	Recognize the variety of existing just transition frameworks, guidelines and tools;
			12.	Also recognize the importance of data availability, institutional and human capacity, and legal and regulatory frameworks, particularly for developing countries;
			13.	Encourage Parties to integrate just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs into the development and implementation of their nationally determined contributions;
		II.	Activity 10 of the workplan
			14.	Encourage Parties to report on the social and economic consequences of response measures, in line with paragraph 90 of decision 18/CMA.1, in both a qualitative and a quantitative manner;
			15.	Also encourage Parties that have already reported on the social and economic consequences of response measures to continue and enhance such reporting in both a qualitative and a quantitative manner;
			16.	Request the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on the information on response measures reported by Parties in their biennial transparency reports and present it to the Katowice Committee on Impacts at its 13th meeting.
		
		I.	
	Annex
	Workplan of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures for 2026–2030
		| Activity number | Activity | Responsible actor | Timeline and modalities for implementation | Outputs |
		| 1 | Consider the KCI annual report (para. 5(j) of annex I to decisions 13/CP.28, 4/CMP.18 and 19/CMA.5) | Forum KCI | – | – |
		| 2 | Prepare information for the technical assessment component of the global stocktake related to the impacts of the implementation of response measures with the process outlined in paragraphs 12–13 of decision 23/CMA.3 (paras. 8 and 24 of decision 19/CMA.1) | Forum KCI | – | – |
		| 3 | Conduct review of the functions, work programme and modalities of the forum and its KCI every five years, starting at SB 69 (November 2028) (para. 6 of decisions 13/CP.28, 4/CMP.18 and 19/CMA.5) | Forum KCI | – | – |
		| 4 | Conduct midterm review of this workplan, starting at SB 68 (June 2028) and to be concluded no later than SB 69 | Forum KCI | – | – |
		| 5 | Assess and analyse the impacts, including socioeconomic impacts, of response measures to be implemented in order to achieve all outcomes of the global stocktake and different net zero scenarios and pathways | Forum KCI | (a) Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices (b) Preparing technical papers; national, regional and sector-specific case studies; concrete examples; and guidelines (c) Receiving input from and facilitating collaboration with experts, practitioners and relevant organizations (d) Organizing workshops | One report  Regional workshops Recommendations to the governing bodies |
		| 6 | Analyse, assess and report on the impacts of measures taken to combat climate change, including cross-border impacts, recalling Article 3, paragraph 5, of the Convention | Forum KCI | (a) Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices (b) Preparing technical papers; national, regional and sector-specific case studies; concrete examples; and guidelines (c) Receiving input from and facilitating collaboration with experts, practitioners and relevant organizations (d) Organizing workshops | Two reports Recommendations to the governing bodies |
		| 7 | Identify and exchange experience on ways to enhance international cooperation to increase the capacity of the workforce and promote the development of emerging low- and zero-emission industries, including through the Technology Mechanism, and through education, retooling the workforce, training and retraining, and skilling and reskilling, with regard to low- and zero-emission development, and financial instruments that enable, mobilize and catalyse support | Forum KCI | (a) Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices (b) Preparing technical papers; national, regional and sector-specific case studies; concrete examples; and guidelines (c) Receiving input from and facilitating collaboration with experts, practitioners and relevant organizations (d) Organizing workshops | One report Recommendations to the governing bodies |
		| 8 | Facilitate the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices among Parties, the secretariat and other international organizations on conducting impact assessments | Forum KCI | (a) Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices (b) Preparing technical papers; national, regional and sector-specific case studies; concrete examples; and guidelines (c) Receiving input from and facilitating collaboration with experts, practitioners and relevant organizations (d) Organizing workshops | Summary reports In-session workshops Recommendations to the governing bodies |
		| 9 | Identify ways and means of enhancing public–private partnerships to address the impacts of the implementation of response measures | Forum KCI | (a) Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices (b) Preparing technical papers; national, regional and sector-specific case studies; concrete examples; and guidelines (c) Receiving input from and facilitating collaboration with experts, practitioners and relevant organizations (d) Organizing workshops | In-session workshop Recommendations to the governing bodies |
		| 10 | Develop a KCI toolbox that can be customized to local circumstances, including methodologies, for Parties to use in identifying, assessing and addressing the impacts of response measures, and build capacity and share experience in relation to using the toolbox | Forum KCI | (a) Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices (b) Preparing technical papers; national, regional and sector-specific case studies; concrete examples; and guidelines (c) Receiving input from and facilitating collaboration with experts, practitioners and relevant organizations (d) Organizing workshops | Two reports  Recommendations to the governing bodies |
		| 11 | Develop a case study in each of the five United Nations regions on just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs and on economic diversification and transformation in order to understand the opportunities and challenges faced in planning and implementation, and share the findings among Parties and experts | Forum KCI | (a) Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices (b) Preparing technical papers; national, regional and sector-specific case studies; concrete examples; and guidelines (c) Receiving input from and facilitating collaboration with experts, practitioners and relevant organizations (d) Organizing workshops | One report per region  Recommendations to the governing bodies |
		| 12 | Develop case studies to identify and analyse the social and economic impacts of economy-wide nationally determined contributions, covering all greenhouse gases, sectors and categories | Forum KCI | (a) Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices (b) Preparing technical papers; national, regional and sector-specific case studies; concrete examples; and guidelines (c) Receiving input from and facilitating collaboration with experts, practitioners and relevant organizations (d) Organizing workshops | One report Recommendations to the governing bodies |
		| 13 | Assess and compile guidelines for reporting, in the context of the enhanced transparency framework under the Paris Agreement, on the assessment and analysis of the impacts of the implementation of response measures on Parties with economies most affected by the impacts of response measures as referred to in Article 4, paragraph 15, of the Paris Agreement | Forum KCI | (a) Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices (b) Preparing technical papers; national, regional and sector-specific case studies; concrete examples; and guidelines (c) Receiving input from and facilitating collaboration with experts, practitioners and relevant organizations (d) Organizing workshops | One report One regional workshop Recommendations to the governing bodies |
		| 14 | Organize an annual ministerial high-level round table on the impacts of the implementation of response measures, to be held in conjunction with sessions of the governing bodies | – | (a) Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices (b) Preparing technical papers; national, regional and sector-specific case studies; concrete examples; and guidelines (c) Receiving input from and facilitating collaboration with experts, practitioners and relevant organizations (d) Organizing workshops | Summary report |
		| 15 | Enhance the capacity of Parties to carry out their own assessment and analysis of and produce reports on the impacts of the implementation of response measures through training and capacity-building efforts, including existing initiatives | Forum KCI | (a) Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices (b) Preparing technical papers; national, regional and sector-specific case studies; concrete examples; and guidelines (c) Receiving input from and facilitating collaboration with experts, practitioners and relevant organizations (d) Organizing workshops | One report Regional workshops Recommendations to the governing bodies |
		| 16 | Identify and exchange experience on technological solutions aimed at reducing climate change impacts and creating decent work | Forum KCI | (a) Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices (b) Preparing technical papers; national, regional and sector-specific case studies; concrete examples; and guidelines (c) Receiving input from and facilitating collaboration with experts, practitioners and relevant organizations (d) Organizing workshops | Two reports Recommendations to the governing bodies |
		| 17 | Promote the availability and use of guidelines and policy frameworks to assist Parties in promoting economic diversification and just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs within and across sectors, including through training, retooling, retraining and reskilling systems and stakeholder engagement strategies | Forum KCI | (a) Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices (b) Preparing technical papers; national, regional and sector-specific case studies; concrete examples; and guidelines (c) Receiving input from and facilitating collaboration with experts, practitioners and relevant organizations (d) Organizing workshops | One report Recommendations to the governing bodies |
		
			
	Decision 23/CMA.6
	Matters relating to the committee to facilitate implementation and promote compliance referred to in Article 15, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
		Recalling Article 15 of the Paris Agreement,
		Also recalling decision 20/CMA.1, paragraphs 1–2,
		Noting with appreciation the annual report of the committee to facilitate implementation and promote compliance referred to in Article 15, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, including the recommendations contained in chapter V thereof,
		Also noting with appreciation the work undertaken by the Committee to date,
		1.	Decides to postpone the first review of the modalities and procedures for the effective operation of the committee to facilitate implementation and promote compliance referred to in Article 15, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) to the ninth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (November 2027) owing to the limited experience of the Committee gained to date in implementing those modalities and procedures, noting that the Committee will gain significant relevant experience in implementing them in connection with the upcoming communications of nationally determined contributions and submissions of biennial transparency reports and biennial communications of information related to Article 9, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement;
		2.	Requests the Committee to undertake the first review of its modalities and procedures with a view to making recommendations for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its ninth session.
		11th plenary meeting
		23 November 2024
		
		I.	
		Resolution 1/CMA.6
		Expression of gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the people of the city of Baku
			Resolution submitted by the Federative Republic of Brazil
				The Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
				Having met in Baku from 11 to 24 November 2024,
				1.	Express profound gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Azerbaijan for having made it possible for the twenty-ninth session of the Conference of the Parties, the nineteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the sixth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to be held in Baku;
				2.	Request the Government of the Republic of Azerbaijan to convey to the city and people of Baku the gratitude of the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement for the hospitality and warmth extended to the participants.
				11th plenary meeting
				23 November 2024
				
				
