|  | United Nations | FCCC/KP/CMP/2021/8/Add.1 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 8 March 2022  Original: English |

Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting 
of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol
Report of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol on its 
sixteenth session, held in Glasgow from 31 October 
to 13 November 2021
	Addendum
	Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its sixteenth session
	Contents
Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol
	Decision	Page
	1/CMP.16	Glasgow Climate Pact		2
	2/CMP.16	Guidance relating to the clean development mechanism		3
	3/CMP.16	Report of the Adaptation Fund Board for 2020 and 2021		7
	4/CMP.16	Fourth review of the Adaptation Fund		11
	5/CMP.16	Fourth comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for 
		capacity-building in developing countries under the Kyoto Protocol		14
	6/CMP.16	Fifth review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building 
		in countries with economies in transition under the Kyoto Protocol		16
	7/CMP.16	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of 
		response measures		18
	8/CMP.16	Programme budget for the biennium 2022–2023		26
	9/CMP.16	Budget for the international transaction log		31
	10/CMP.16	Administrative, financial and institutional matters		34
	Resolution
	1/CMP.16	Expression of gratitude to the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
		and Northern Ireland and the people of the city of Glasgow		37
Decision 1/CMP.16
Glasgow Climate Pact
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
	Recalling decision 1/CMP.8,
	1.	Congratulates Parties that have accepted the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol;
	2.	Welcomes the entry into force of the Doha Amendment, on 31 December 2020;
	3.	Notes that the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol ended on 31 December 2020;
	4.	Strongly urges Parties that have accepted the Doha Amendment to implement their pre-2020 commitments to the fullest extent as soon as possible.
	10th plenary meeting
13 November 2021
	
Decision 2/CMP.16
Guidance relating to the clean development mechanism
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
	Recalling Articles 3 and 12 of the Kyoto Protocol,
	Also recalling decision 3/CMP.1 and subsequent guidance provided by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol relating to the clean development mechanism,
	Acknowledging the contribution to global efforts to address climate change of the clean development mechanism, which as at 31 October 2021 was responsible for over 7,849 project activities being registered, 356 programmes of activities being registered and over 2.17 billion certified emission reductions being issued, of which over 301 million had been voluntarily cancelled either in national registries or in the clean development mechanism registry,
	Welcoming the entry into force of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol,
	Cognizant of decision 3/CMA.3 and its annex,
	Recognizing the need for a smooth transition from the clean development mechanism to the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement,
I.	General
	1.	Welcomes the reports for 2019–2020 and 2020–2021 of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism;
	2.	Takes note of the work undertaken over the past two years by the Executive Board, its panels and the secretariat in overseeing the implementation of the mechanism and maintaining stakeholder engagement in its operations;
	3.	Designates as operational entities those entities that have been accredited and provisionally designated as such by the Executive Board to carry out sectoral scope-specific validation and/or verification functions as set out in the annex;
II.	Baseline and monitoring methodologies
	4.	Acknowledges the work of the Executive Board in reviewing methodological approaches to calculating emission reductions achieved by project activities that result in the reduced use of non-renewable biomass in households and in including in these approaches region-specific default values for the baseline fossil fuel emission factor;
	5.	Requests the Executive Board to continue to review the methodological approaches referred to in paragraph 4 above, in particular with respect to the default baseline assumptions applied;
III.	Functioning of the clean development mechanism beyond the end of the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol
	6.	Acknowledges the recommendations of the Executive Board that the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol provide guidance on the functioning of the clean development mechanism beyond the end of the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol;
	7.	Decides that requests for registration, renewal of crediting period and issuance of certified emission reductions for project activities, as well as the equivalent submissions for programmes of activities, relating to emission reductions occurring after 31 December 2020 may not be submitted under the clean development mechanism, acknowledging that such requests and submissions may be made under the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the Article 6, paragraph 4, mechanism), approval of which is subject to compliance with its rules, modalities and procedures and any other requirements determined by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement or the body that supervises the Article 6, paragraph 4, mechanism as designated by decision 3/CMA.3 (hereinafter referred to as the Supervisory Body);
	8.	Also decides to conclude its consideration of the following matters related to the clean development mechanism, which have been referred to the subsidiary bodies:
		(a)	Review of the modalities and procedures for the clean development mechanism, referred to the Subsidiary Body for Implementation;
		(b)	Procedures, mechanisms and institutional arrangements for appeals against decisions of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism, referred to the Subsidiary Body for Implementation;
		(c)	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3−4, of the Kyoto Protocol and the clean development mechanism, referred to the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice;
		(d)	Implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest in exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development mechanism project activities, referred to the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice;
	9.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to consider measures for implementing aspects relating to the clean development mechanism registry in decision 3/CMA.3 and to develop recommendations for consideration by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its seventeenth session (November 2022);
	10.	Also requests the Executive Board to cooperate with the Supervisory Body upon its request to facilitate the expedited implementation of the Article 6, paragraph 4, mechanism;
	11.	Further requests the Executive Board to make available hard and soft infrastructure under the clean development mechanism to the Supervisory Body to facilitate the expedited implementation of the Article 6, paragraph 4, mechanism;
	12.	Decides that any registered clean development mechanism project activities and programmes of activities that have transitioned to the Article 6, paragraph 4, mechanism in accordance with decision 3/CMA.3 shall be deregistered from the clean development mechanism effective from the date of transition;
	13.	Requests the Executive Board to retain the provisional status accorded to the requests for registration, renewal of crediting period and issuance of certified emission reductions for project activities as well as to the equivalent submissions for programmes of activities under the temporary measures adopted by the Executive Board at its 108th meeting, acknowledging decision 3/CMA.3, according to which the requests and other submissions that have been accorded provisional status under the temporary measures that meet the conditions for transition therein may transition to the Article 6, paragraph 4, mechanism;
	14.	Also requests the Executive Board to reject the requests and other submissions that have been accorded provisional status under the temporary measures but have not subsequently transitioned to the Article 6, paragraph 4, mechanism;
	15.	Decides that the Executive Board may continue receiving and processing the relevant requests and submissions under the temporary measures until the date when the process for submission of requests to the secretariat to transition the requests and other submissions that have been accorded provisional status to the Article 6, paragraph 4, mechanism becomes operational, as may be specified by the Supervisory Body;
IV.	Management of financial resources
	16.	Decides to discontinue the allocation, as set out in decision 3/CMP.6, of any interest accruing on the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism, given the administrative and budgetary closure of the CDM Loan Scheme in 2020 pursuant to decision 3/CMP.12;
	17.	Also decides to allocate the remaining balance of the CDM Loan Scheme and any interest accruing on the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities for capacity-building to enhance regional climate action;
	18.	Further decides to authorize the transfer of USD 30 million from the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities for the work of the Supervisory Body to facilitate the expedited implementation of the Article 6, paragraph 4, mechanism;
	19.	Decides to authorize the transfer of USD 10 million from the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities for the work of the Supervisory Body to provide, through the regional collaboration centres, capacity-building in developing countries for applying the Article 6, paragraph 4, mechanism, and support for the transition of clean development mechanism project activities and programmes of activities to the Article 6, paragraph 4, mechanism if they are eligible for transition;
	20.	Also decides to authorize the transfer of USD 20 million from the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism to the Adaptation Fund;
	21.	Invites the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to allocate the equivalent amount referred to in paragraph 18 above from the fund supporting the Article 6, paragraph 4, mechanism to the Adaptation Fund after the Article 6, paragraph 4, mechanism has become self-financing;
	22.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to review the status of the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism and to develop recommendations for consideration by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its eighteenth session (November 2023).
	
Annex
	Designation of operational entities by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its sixteenth session
		[English only]
		| Name of entity | Sectoral scopes (validation and verification) |
		| China Building Material Test and Certification Group Co. Ltd. (CTC)a | 1–4, 6, 9–10, 13–15 |
		| China Certification Center, Inc. (CCCI)a | 1–15 |
		| China Classification Society Certification Company (CCSC)a | 1–10, 13–14 |
		| KBS Certification Services Pvt. Ltd. (KBS)a | 1–5, 7–10, 12–15 |
		| Lloyd’s Register Quality Assurance Ltd. (LRQA)b | 1–3, 7, 13 |
		| China Building Material Test and Certification Group Co. Ltd. (CTC)c | 5, 11, 16 |
		| Korean Standards Association (KSA)c | 14–15 |
		
			a Accreditation granted for five years.
			b Voluntary withdrawal of accreditation in its entirety.
			c Extension of scope. For the entities for which the scope of accreditation was extended, only the new sectoral scopes are indicated.
			10th plenary meeting
13 November 2021
	Decision 3/CMP.16
		Report of the Adaptation Fund Board for 2020 and 2021
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
			Recalling decisions 1/CMP.3, 1/CMP.4, 2/CMP.10, 1/CMP.11, 2/CMP.12, 1/CMP.13, 1/CMP.14 and 3/CMP.15,
			Also recalling decision 13/CMA.1,
			1.	Takes note of the annual reports of the Adaptation Fund Board for 2020 and 2021 and the information contained therein;
			2.	Notes the following information, actions and decisions relating to the Adaptation Fund Board presented in the reports referred to in paragraph 1 above:
				(a)	A request for the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and/or the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to provide guidance and/or clarification on how to address requests for funding from Parties that are either a Party to the Kyoto Protocol or a Party to the Paris Agreement but not a Party to both;
				(b)	The updated response of the Adaptation Fund Board to the guidance of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol pertaining to the third review of the Adaptation Fund;
				(c)	The accreditation of 4 national implementing entities, 2 multilateral implementing entities and 1 regional implementing entity (with the national implementing entities granted direct access to resources from the Adaptation Fund), resulting in a total number of accredited implementing entities of 33 national (of which 9 in the least developed countries and 7 in small island developing States), 14 multilateral and 7 regional implementing entities, of which 31 were reaccredited (16 national implementing entities, 4 regional implementing entities and 11 multilateral implementing entities) for accessing resources from the Adaptation Fund directly;
				(d)	Cumulative project and programme approvals increasing by around 32 per cent to USD 744.58 million between 1 July 2019 and 30 June 2020 and by 12 per cent to USD 831.49 million between 1 July 2020 and 30 June 2021, despite the challenging circumstances related to the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic;
				(e)	Resources available for new funding approvals amounting to USD 167.20 million as at 30 June 2020 and USD 195.69 million as at 30 June 2021;
				(f)	New funding approvals, including for concrete single-country and regional (multi-country) proposals, grant proposals under the Medium-Term Strategy of the Adaptation Fund for 2018–2022 and readiness grants amounting to USD 180.5 million as at 30 June 2020 and USD 86.9 million as at 30 June 2021;
				(g)	An active pipeline of project and programme proposals submitted but not approved amounting to around USD 286 million as at 30 June 2020 and USD 279 million as at 30 June 2021, reflecting an upward trend from previous years;
				(h)	The cumulative receipts of USD 1,107.40 million, as at 30 June 2021, into the Adaptation Fund Trust Fund, comprising USD 208.38 million from the monetization of certified emission reductions, USD 858.82 million from contributions and USD 40.21 million from investment income earned on the Trust Fund balance;
				(i)	Contributions amounting to USD 200.89 million between 1 July 2019 and 30 June 2021 from the Governments of Germany, Ireland, Norway, Poland, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland, as well as the governments of the Brussels-Capital, Flemish and Walloon Regions of Belgium; new pledges amounting to USD 116 million from the Governments of Germany, Ireland, Italy and Sweden, as well as the governments of the Brussels-Capital and Walloon Regions of Belgium, towards the Adaptation Fund resource mobilization target of USD 120 million per year for the biennium 2020–2021; direct funding of EUR 10 million from the European Commission for a programme under the Adaptation Fund Innovation Facility; and the transfer of aggregated contributions from the United Nations Foundation, comprising various individual donations made between 1 July 2019 and 30 June 2020, prepared by the Adaptation Fund Board secretariat and the trustee;
				(j)	Outstanding pledges of USD 21.85 million as at 30 June 2020 and outstanding contributions of USD 36.27 million as at 30 June 2021;
				(k)	The approval of 29 single-country project or programme proposals submitted by implementing entities, totalling USD 174 million, of which 9 proposals submitted by national implementing entities, amounting to USD 14.5 million; 1 single-country proposal submitted by a regional implementing entity, amounting to USD 9.9 million; and 19 single-country proposals submitted by multilateral implementing entities, totalling USD 149.6 million;
				(l)	The recommendation of the Project and Programme Review Committee to approve nine regional (multi-country) projects amounting to USD 93.9 million, for which funding was not readily available for one project from the tentatively set-aside amount, and the resulting decision of the Adaptation Fund Board to place it on a waitlist, to be approved intersessionally subject to the availability of funds;
				(m)	The ongoing implementation of activities under the Medium-Term Strategy of the Adaptation Fund for 2018–2022, with the second, third, fourth and fifth review cycles for grant funding windows for innovation, learning and project scale-up and the approval by the Adaptation Fund Board of the first four small-grant proposals for innovation, the first grant proposal for project scale-up and two grant proposals for learning, totalling USD 1,348,322; and the launch of two new innovation aggregator programmes, totalling USD 10 million, that offer small grants for innovation to non-accredited entities via two accredited multilateral implementing entities;
				(n)	The facilitation of the 2nd meeting of the Committee of the Community of Practice for Direct Access Entities, held with the participation of the Green Climate Fund;
				(o)	New activities under the Medium-Term Strategy of the Adaptation Fund for 2018–2022, including the approval of large grants for innovation and a funding window for enhanced direct access; the endorsement of the principles of locally led adaptation action following engagement with the Global Commission; and the launch of the Adaptation Fund Climate Innovation Accelerator;
				(p)	The launch of a virtual learning course on unlocking adaptation finance and accessing the Adaptation Fund;
				(q)	The approval of funding decisions for readiness grants amounting to USD 234,820, consisting of South–South cooperation grants and technical assistance grants for the environmental and social safeguards policy and the gender policy; and a new readiness support package grant window following a successful pilot phase;
				(r)	The organization of virtual readiness events for accredited national implementing entities, including two webinars on project development, a global accreditation training workshop and a country exchange for South–South learning;
				(s)	Cumulative disbursements to the 121 projects approved since the operationalization of the Adaptation Fund amounting to USD 485.9 million, including USD 76.2 million disbursed between 1 July 2020 and 30 June 2021;
				(t)	The implementation of proactive measures to support Parties and implementing entities in mitigating the effects of the pandemic and minimizing any related disruption, and to mitigate the impact on the portfolio of the Adaptation Fund;
				(u)	The issuance of targeted communication and messaging on themes such as the unique value of the pioneering scalable work of the Adaptation Fund, the implementation of the Medium-Term Strategy of the Adaptation Fund for 2018–2022, the response of the Adaptation Fund to the pandemic and the value of the Adaptation Fund in building broader resilience;
				(v)	The promotion of linkages of the Adaptation Fund with other bodies under the Convention, such as the Adaptation Committee, the Climate Technology Centre and Network, the Global Environment Facility, the Green Climate Fund, the Paris Committee on Capacity-building and the Standing Committee on Finance – the Adaptation Fund Board held discussions on linkages between the Adaptation Fund and the Green Climate Fund, including through a framework for promoting the scaling up of funded projects and the Community of Practice for Direct Access Entities;
				(w)	Policy decisions regarding project approval and implementation, including to streamline the project and programme review process, to update the policy for project and programme delays and to make readiness grants available throughout the year by including an additional review cycle;
				(x)	The approval of the updated Adaptation Fund gender policy and action plan and application of the updated Adaptation Fund project performance report template by implementing entities to track progress more systematically;
				(y)	Consideration of options for further enhancing civil society participation and engagement in Adaptation Fund work;
				(z)	The implementation of activities of the Technical Evaluation Reference Group of the Adaptation Fund as the basis for developing and approving its multi-year strategy and work programme and corresponding two-year budget, including evaluative activities as part of the multi-year strategy and work programme approved by the Adaptation Fund Board, such as the revision of the Adaptation Fund evaluation framework and the midterm review of the Medium-Term Strategy of the Adaptation Fund for 2018–2022;
			3.	Welcomes with appreciation the decision of the Adaptation Fund Board to increase the finance access cap per country from USD 10 million to USD 20 million and the number of accredited national implementing entities per eligible developing country Party from one to two;
			4.	Welcomes the financial pledges to the Adaptation Fund made by the European Commission, the Governments of Canada, Finland, Germany, Ireland, Norway, Qatar, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, as well as the governments of the Brussels-Capital, Flemish and Walloon Regions of Belgium and the provincial government of Quebec, equivalent to USD 356 million;
			5.	Reiterates the encouragement to scale up financial resources, including the provision of voluntary support, that are additional to the share of proceeds levied on certified emission reductions in order to support the resource mobilization efforts of the Adaptation Fund Board with a view to strengthening the Adaptation Fund;
			6.	Confirms that developing country Parties to the Paris Agreement that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change are eligible for funding from the Adaptation Fund and requests the Adaptation Fund Board to amend the relevant operational policies and guidelines, as well as its strategic priorities, policies and guidelines accordingly;
			7.	Confirms that Parties to the Paris Agreement are eligible for membership on the Adaptation Fund Board and requests the Adaptation Fund Board to amend the relevant procedures and modalities;
			8.	Also requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to continue its consideration of matters relating to membership of the Adaptation Fund Board further to decision 1/CMP.14, paragraph 5, and to forward a recommendation to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol for consideration at its next session;
			9.	Welcomes the operationalization of the fast-track accreditation process on the basis of operational complementarities between the Adaptation Fund and the Green Climate Fund;
			10.	Takes note of the findings from the midterm review of the Medium-Term Strategy of the Adaptation Fund for 2018–2022 and underlines the relevance, niche function and ambition of the Adaptation Fund in contributing to the implementation of adaptation action in a timely manner;
			11.	Requests the Adaptation Fund Board, in line with its existing mandate and decision 1/CMP.3, to consider providing support for country-driven adaptation projects and programmes in developing countries with a view to contributing to enhancing implementation of their national adaptation plans and other voluntary adaptation planning processes;
			12.	Notes the importance of finalizing the draft resource mobilization strategy of the Adaptation Fund for 2021–2024 in order to encourage mobilization of resources for the Fund.
			10th plenary meeting
13 November 2021
	Decision 4/CMP.16
		Fourth review of the Adaptation Fund
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
			Recalling decisions 1/CMP.3, 6/CMP.6, 2/CMP.9, 2/CMP.10 and 1/CMP.14,
			Also recalling decision 1/CP.21,
			Further recalling decision 13/CMA.1,
			1.	Decides that the fourth review of the Adaptation Fund will be undertaken in accordance with decision 1/CMP.3, paragraph 33, and the terms of reference contained in the annex;
			2.	Requests the Adaptation Fund Board to make available in its report to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its seventeenth session (November 2022) and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its fourth session (November 2022) information on the financial status of the Adaptation Fund, including information on the share of proceeds levied on first international transfers of assigned amount units and emission reduction units for Article 6 projects of the Kyoto Protocol, in accordance with decision 1/CMP.8, paragraph 21, with a view to the fourth review of the Adaptation Fund being finalized at the same session;
			3.	Invites Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, Parties to the Paris Agreement and observer organizations, as well as other interested international organizations, stakeholders and non-governmental organizations involved in the activities of the Adaptation Fund, and implementing entities accredited by the Adaptation Fund Board, to submit their views on the fourth review of the Adaptation Fund based on the terms of reference set out in the annex via the submission portal by 31 March 2022 for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its fifty-sixth session (June 2022);
			4.	Takes note of decision 13/CMA.1, stating that the Adaptation Fund shall serve under the guidance of, and be accountable to, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement with respect to all matters relating to the Paris Agreement, effective 1 January 2019, subject to the decision on this matter made by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and notes decision 1/CMP.14, in which it decided, inter alia, to ensure that developing country Parties and developed country Parties that are Parties to the Paris Agreement are eligible for membership on the Adaptation Fund Board;
			5.	Requests the secretariat, in collaboration with the Adaptation Fund Board secretariat, to prepare a technical paper on the fourth review of the Adaptation Fund, in accordance with the terms of reference set out in the annex, taking into account the deliberations and conclusions of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its fifty-sixth session and the submissions referred to in paragraph 3 above, for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its fifty-seventh session (November 2022);
			6.	Also requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to complete its work on the fourth review of the Adaptation Fund at its fifty-seventh session, while welcoming the participation of Parties to the Paris Agreement, with a view to recommending a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its seventeenth session;
			7.	Invites the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to consider the outcomes of the review at its fourth session.
	Annex
	Terms of reference for the fourth review of the Adaptation Fund
		I.	Objective
			1.	The objective of the fourth review of the Adaptation Fund is to ensure the effectiveness, sustainability and adequacy of the Fund and its operations.
		II.	Scope
			2.	The scope of the review will cover the progress made to date and lessons learned in the operationalization and implementation of the Fund and it will focus on, inter alia:
				(a)	The provision of sustainable, predictable, accessible and adequate financial resources and the mobilization of financial resources to fund concrete adaptation projects and programmes that are country driven and based on the needs, views and priorities of developing country Parties;
				(b)	Lessons learned from:
					(i)	The application of the access modalities of the Adaptation Fund, including its operational policies and guidelines, including its Streamlined Accreditation Process;
					(ii)	The project approval procedures of the Adaptation Fund and timeliness of disbursement of approved adaptation grants;
					(iii)	The results and impacts of approved adaptation projects and programmes;
					(iv)	The readiness programme for direct access to climate finance, including lessons learned from South–South cooperation and enhanced direct access grants;
					(v)	The programme for regional projects;
					(vi)	The Innovation Facility;
				(c)	Programming and project coherence and complementarity between the Adaptation Fund and other institutions funding adaptation projects and programmes, in particular institutions under the Convention and the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism and its specialized funds;
				(d)	The institutional arrangements for the Adaptation Fund, in particular the arrangements with the interim secretariat and the interim trustee.
		III.	Sources of information
			3.	The review shall draw upon, inter alia, the following sources of information:
				(a)	Submissions from Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, Parties to the Paris Agreement, observer organizations, other interested international organizations, stakeholders and non-governmental organizations involved in the activities of the Adaptation Fund, as well as implementing entities accredited by the Adaptation Fund Board, on their experience regarding the Adaptation Fund;
				(b)	The annual reports of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) to the Conference of the Parties (COP) on its activities as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism, including the information on the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund, and other relevant GEF policy, information and evaluation documents;
				(c)	The annual reports of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) to the COP on its activities as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism and other relevant GCF policy and information documents;
				(d)	The report of the Adaptation Fund Board to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, the Adaptation Fund annual performance report for the most recent fiscal year and the outcomes of previous reviews of the Adaptation Fund;
				(e)	The outcomes and reports emanating from United Nations processes, relevant bilateral and multilateral funding institutions and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations dealing with climate change financing;
				(f)	The reports of the relevant constituted bodies;
					(g)	The reports on the work programme on long-term finance;
				(h)	The technical paper and summary for policymakers arising from the technical examination process on adaptation in 2020;
				(i)	The reports on the independent evaluation of the Adaptation Fund (phase two) and the midterm review of the implementation of the Medium-Term Strategy of the Adaptation Fund for 2018–2022.
			10th plenary meeting
13 November 2021
		Decision 5/CMP.16
		Fourth comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries under the Kyoto Protocol
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
			Recalling decisions 29/CMP.1, 6/CMP.4, 15/CMP.7, 6/CMP.12, 2/CP.7, 2/CP.17 and 10/CP.25,
				1.	Notes with appreciation the continued progress in the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries established under decision 2/CP.7 (hereinafter referred to as the capacity-building framework), demonstrated by the increase in capacity-building activities undertaken by a growing range of bodies and practitioners under and outside the Convention during the period covered by the fourth comprehensive review of the implementation of the capacity-building framework under the Kyoto Protocol (2017–2021);
				2.	Recognizes that, while the objective and scope of capacity-building in developing countries as set out in decision 2/CP.7 and the priority areas as contained in decision 29/CMP.1 are still relevant, current and emerging areas in the context of the Kyoto Protocol should also be taken into account in the further implementation of the capacity-building framework under the Kyoto Protocol;
				3.	Welcomes the Durban Forum on capacity-building as one of the key modalities that have enhanced progress in implementing the capacity-building framework under the Kyoto Protocol;
				4.	Also welcomes the wide range of capacity-building activities undertaken by constituted bodies under the Kyoto Protocol, the increased coherence and collaboration between bodies, the practice of building and improving on previous work where useful, and the collaboration with relevant stakeholders;
				5.	Emphasizes the value of strengthening the participation of relevant stakeholders, including non-State actors, in undertaking capacity-building activities;
				6.	Notes that, while progress has been made, gaps and needs remain in addressing the priority areas as contained in decision 29/CMP.1;
				7.	Invites Parties to foster networking and enhance their collaboration with academia and research centres with a view to promoting individual, institutional and systemic capacity-building through education, training and public awareness;
				8.	Notes the importance of sharing examples of best practices and lessons learned among Parties and capacity-building practitioners;
				9.	Emphasizes the importance of building long-term capacity in developing countries, including by promoting strong domestic enabling environments;
				10.	Notes that monitoring and reviewing the impacts of capacity-building remains challenging and needs to be conducted in specific contexts to better assess progress and evaluate the effectiveness of capacity-building activities;
				11.	Recognizes the importance of continuing to identify and disseminate lessons learned to enhance the implementation of capacity-building activities, including through the Durban Forum;
				12.	Invites Parties to cooperate in order to enhance the capacity of developing countries to implement the Kyoto Protocol and also invites Parties, as appropriate, and other stakeholders to continue to provide support for capacity-building actions in developing countries;
				13.	Concludes the fourth comprehensive review of the implementation of the capacity-building framework under the Kyoto Protocol;
				14.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to develop terms of reference for the fifth comprehensive review of the implementation of the capacity-building framework under the Kyoto Protocol at its sixty-second session (2025) for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its twentieth session (2025);
				15.	Also requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to initiate the fifth comprehensive review of the implementation of the capacity-building framework under the Kyoto Protocol at its sixty-fourth session (2026) with a view to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol concluding it at its twenty-first session (2026).
				9th plenary meeting
11 November 2021
		Decision 6/CMP.16
		Fifth review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in countries with economies in transition under the Kyoto Protocol
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
			Recalling decisions 3/CP.7, 3/CP.10, 30/CMP.1, 11/CMP.8 and 4/CMP.13,
			Acknowledging that capacity-building for countries with economies in transition is essential to enabling them to implement effectively their commitments under the Kyoto Protocol,
				1.	Recognizes that:
					(a)	Significant progress has been made in building the capacity of countries with economies in transition to mitigate climate change, and that some recipients of assistance have started to transfer their own expertise, knowledge and lessons learned on capacity-building to Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(b)	Parties included in Annex I to the Convention and the Global Environment Facility, within its mandate, have provided adequate resources and assistance for the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in countries with economies in transition established under decision 3/CP.7 and reaffirmed by decision 30/CMP.1;
					(c)	Support was also provided to countries with economies in transition by multilateral development banks and international financial institutions;
					(d)	Countries with economies in transition that are currently receiving support, notwithstanding the progress made, are in need of further capacity-building, in particular for regularly updating and implementing their emission reduction targets, and for developing and implementing national long-term low-emission development strategies consistently with their national priorities;
				2.	Reaffirms that the scope of the needs identified in the framework for capacity-building in countries with economies in transition established under decision 3/CP.7 and 30/CMP.1 and the key factors identified in decision 3/CP.10 remain relevant and continue to be the basis for, and guide the implementation of, capacity-building activities in countries with economies in transition;
				3.	Encourages the engagement of countries with economies in transition in future discussions at the Durban Forum, as appropriate, to explore potential ways for enhancing capacity-building in countries with economies in transition by sharing examples of best practices and lessons learned;
				4.	Invites Parties to enhance reporting on best practices related to capacity-building in their national communications, biennial reports, submissions and other relevant documents with a view to furthering learning and broadening the impact of capacity-building activities in countries with economies in transition;
				5.	Also invites Parties included in Annex II to the Convention and other Parties in a position to do so, the Global Environment Facility, multilateral and bilateral agencies, international organizations, multilateral development banks, international financial institutions and the private sector or any further arrangements, as appropriate and within their mandates, to continue to provide support for capacity-building activities in countries with economies in transition;
				6.	Further invites Parties and relevant institutions to provide information on capacity-building activities in countries with economies in transition to the secretariat for inclusion on the capacity-building portal;
				7.	Decides to conclude the fifth review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in countries with economies in transition under the Kyoto Protocol and requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, at its sixty-fourth session (2026), to initiate the sixth review thereof with a view to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol concluding it at its twenty-first session (2026);
				8.	Also requests the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in countries with economies in transition to support the sixth review thereof for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its sixty-fourth session.
				9th plenary meeting
11 November 2021
		Decision 7/CMP.16
		Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures
			The Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
			Recalling decisions 7/CP.24, 4/CP.25, 3/CMP.14, 4/CMP.15 and 7/CMA.1,
			1.	Welcome with appreciation the annual report of the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures (hereinafter referred to as the Katowice Committee on Impacts) for 2020–2021 and the progress of the Katowice Committee on Impacts in supporting the work of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures (hereinafter referred to as the forum), noting that, on an exceptional basis, the 2020–2021 annual report was considered before consideration of the 2020 annual report and continuation of consideration of the 2019 annual report;
			2.	Welcome the informal event and technical expert meetings held virtually in 2020 and 2021 by the Chairs of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, which served as input to the forum’s work on implementing the relevant activities in the workplan of the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts, and underscore the challenges experienced with participating in meetings in a virtual setting in 2020 and 2021;
			3.	Note the limitations to progress and limited progress in the implementation of the functions and modalities of the forum and of certain activities in the workplan by the forum, including due to the exceptional circumstances, and therefore request the secretariat to hold a two-day workshop in conjunction with the fifty-sixth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (June 2022) to further advance the implementation of workplan activities 3, 4 and 11;
			4.	Welcome the progress made by the Katowice Committee on Impacts in implementing the workplan and the inputs of experts, practitioners and relevant organizations to the work of the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts;
			5.	Adopt the recommendations pertaining to activity 1 of the workplan contained in annex I, forwarded by the forum in the 2020–2021 annual report of the Katowice Committee on Impacts, and invite Parties to implement them, as applicable;
			6.	Adopt the revised rules of procedure of the Katowice Committee on Impacts contained in annex II;
			7.	Recall decision 7/CMA.1 and the functions of the forum and note that the forum, when considering the annual reports of the Katowice Committee on Impacts and the recommendations contained therein, should consider ways to promote actions to minimize the adverse impacts and maximize the positive impacts of the implementation of response measures;
			8.	Request the forum, at the fifty-sixth sessions of the subsidiary bodies, to consider ways to promote actions to minimize the adverse impacts and maximize the positive impacts of the implementation of response measures on the recommendations contained in annex I;
			9.	Recall the rules of procedure of the Katowice Committee on Impacts and encourage groups to nominate members to the Katowice Committee on Impacts taking into account the goal of achieving gender balance;
			10.	Request the secretariat to organize a regional workshop on activity 3 of the workplan before the fifty-sixth sessions of the subsidiary bodies in collaboration with relevant organizations and stakeholders to address regional needs and acknowledge the work that is being carried out by the Katowice Committee on Impacts and note that further regional workshops on activity 3 could be decided by the forum;
			11.	Invite Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal by April 2022 their views on the elements of the midterm review of the workplan of the forum and its Katowice Committee on Impacts and request the secretariat to prepare a summary of the submissions with a view to informing Parties’ discussion on the midterm review starting at the fifty-sixth sessions of the subsidiary bodies;
			12.	Take note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 3 and 11 above;
			13.	Request that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
			
	Annex I
	Recommendations forwarded by the forum pertaining to activity 1 of the workplan: exploring approaches to inform the development and implementation of climate change mitigation strategies, plans, policies and programmes that maximize the positive and minimize the negative impacts of response measures
		1.	Encourage Parties to engage relevant stakeholders at each step of the process of designing and implementing climate mitigation policies and policies to achieve sustainable development, including through social dialogue, when possible and subject to national circumstances. The relevant stakeholders among others include workers, employers, organizations, academia, the public and private sectors, women and civil society.
		2.	Encourage Parties to explore complementary policies, such as economic policies, social protection and labour policies, to help strengthen the outcomes of the implementation of mitigation strategies, plans, policies and programmes, including nationally determined contributions and low-emission development strategies.
		3.	Encourage Parties to strengthen international and regional cooperation as it contributes to planning and implementation of mitigation policies with environmental and socioeconomic benefits, for example to help facilitate technology development and transfer in accordance with Article 10 of the Paris Agreement, and strive towards harmonized regional approaches.
		4.	Encourage Parties to use existing qualitative and quantitative assessment methodologies and tools to understand social, economic and employment effects of proposed mitigation measures as a way to inform and guide climate policies and to maximize the positive and minimize the negative effects of the implementation of response measures. More analysis of impacts, including, inter alia, sectoral, national, subnational, domestic and cross border, would be useful for informing climate policies and understanding how to maximize the positive and minimize the negative effects of the implementation of response measures.
		5.	Encourage the forum and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures to enhance the capacity of Parties, particularly developing country Parties, through training and capacity-building efforts, including existing initiatives. This will enable Parties to carry out their own assessments and analyses of the impacts of response measures.
		
	Annex II
		Revised rules of procedure of the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures
		I.	Scope
			1.	These rules of procedure shall apply to the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures (KCI) in accordance with decision 7/CMA.1 and its annex.
		II.	Mandate
			2.	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA), by decision 7/CMA.1, decided to establish the KCI to support the work of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures in implementing its work programme and operating in accordance with the terms of reference contained in the annex to that decision.
			3.	The forum and the KCI may use the following modalities, as appropriate and as decided on a case-by-case basis, to carry out the work programme of the forum:
				(a)	Building awareness and enhancing information-sharing through the exchange and sharing of experience and best practices;
				(b)	Preparing technical papers, case studies, specific examples and guidelines;
				(c)	Receiving inputs from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations;
				(d)	Organizing workshops.
		III.	Members
			4.	The CMA, by decision 7/CMA.1, decided that the KCI shall be composed of 14 members, of which:
				(a)	Two members from each of the five United Nations regional groups;
				(b)	One member from the least developed countries;
				(c)	One member from the small island developing States;
				(d)	Two members from relevant intergovernmental organizations.
			5.	By the same decision, the CMA also decided that members shall be nominated by their respective groups. Groups are encouraged to nominate members taking into account the goal of achieving gender balance. The Chairs of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) shall be notified of these appointments.
			6.	The CMA further decided that members shall serve in their expert capacity and should have relevant qualifications and expertise in the technical and socioeconomic fields related to the areas of the work programme of the forum.
			7.	Further, the CMA decided that members shall serve a term of two years and be eligible to serve a maximum of two consecutive terms in office. The following rules shall apply:
				(a)	Half of the members shall be nominated initially for a term of three years and half of the members for a term of two years;
				(b)	Thereafter, members are nominated for a term of two years;
				(c)	The members shall remain in office until their successors are nominated. In such a case, the KCI shall notify the Chairs of the SBSTA and the SBI.
			8.	The term of office of a member shall commence at the first meeting of the KCI in the calendar year of their appointment and end immediately before the first meeting of the KCI in the calendar year after their second calendar year in office.
			9.	If a member of the KCI resigns or is otherwise unable to complete the assigned term of office or to perform the functions of that office, the KCI shall request the group that nominated the member to nominate another member for the remainder of the unexpired term, in which case the appointment shall count as one term. In such a case, the KCI shall notify the Chairs of the SBSTA and the SBI.
			10.	If a member is unable to participate in two consecutive meetings of the KCI or unable to perform the functions and tasks set by the KCI, the Co-Chairs of the KCI will bring this matter to the attention of the KCI and seek clarification from the group that nominated that member on the status of their membership.
		IV.	Conflict of interest
			11.	The KCI members must promptly disclose, and recuse themselves from, any deliberations or decision-making that could have a bearing on their personal or financial interests, in order to avoid a conflict of interest or the appearance of one. Further, KCI members shall not disclose any information deemed by the KCI as confidential that they receive in the course of their duties, even after leaving the KCI.
		V.	Co-Chairs
			12.	The CMA decided that the KCI shall elect, on a consensus basis, two members from among its members to serve as Co-Chairs for a term of two years each, taking into account the need to ensure equitable geographical representation.
			13.	The CMA also decided that if one of the Co-Chairs is temporarily unable to fulfil the obligations of the office, another member designated by the KCI shall serve as Co-Chair.
			14.	If one of the Co-Chairs is unable to complete the term of office, the KCI shall elect a replacement from among its members of the relevant group of the incumbent Co-Chair, if available, to complete that term of office.
			15.	The Co-Chairs shall collaborate in chairing meetings of the KCI and in facilitating the work of the KCI throughout the year, in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI, to ensure coherence between meetings.
			16.	Following the completion of the Co-Chairs’ two-year term of office, the KCI shall nominate two members as Co-Chairs to serve the next two-year term of office.
			17.	The Co-Chairs shall declare the opening and closing of meetings of the KCI, ensure the observance of these rules of procedure and rule on points of order.
			18.	The Co-Chairs shall call upon speakers at meetings of the KCI in the order in which they signify their desire to speak. The secretariat shall maintain a list of speakers. The Co-Chairs may call a speaker to order if their remarks are not relevant to the subject under discussion.
			19.	The KCI may further define additional roles and responsibilities for the Co-Chairs.
			20.	In exercising their functions, the Co-Chairs shall remain under the authority of the KCI.
		VI.	Secretariat
			21.	The secretariat shall support and facilitate the work of the KCI, by:
				(a)	Making the necessary arrangements for the meetings of the KCI, including announcing meetings, issuing invitations, making the necessary travel arrangements for members eligible for funding for their participation in meetings and making available relevant documents for meetings;
				(b)	Maintaining meeting records and arranging for the storage and preservation of documents of meetings of the KCI;
				(c)	Making documents of meetings of the KCI available to the public, unless otherwise decided by the KCI.
			22.	The secretariat shall assist the KCI in tracking its actions, in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI, in its annual report.
			23.	In addition, the secretariat shall perform any other functions assigned by the KCI, in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI.
		VII.	Meetings
			24.	The KCI shall meet twice per year, for two days per meeting, in conjunction with the sessions of the subsidiary bodies.
			25.	At least nine members of the KCI must be present to constitute a quorum.
			26.	Members are requested to confirm their attendance at meetings of the KCI as early as possible, and at least four weeks prior to a meeting for members eligible for funding for their participation, to enable sufficient time for the secretariat to make the necessary travel arrangements.
			27.	Should technical and financial resources permit, open meetings of the KCI shall be webcast on the UNFCCC website.
			28.	At each of its meetings, the KCI shall propose the dates of its next meeting. The Co-Chairs will agree the dates of the next meeting in consultation with the secretariat.
		VIII.	Agenda and documentation for meetings
			29.	The Co-Chairs, assisted by the secretariat, shall prepare the provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda for each meeting of the KCI in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI. The Co-Chairs will prepare a report on the meeting, to be agreed by members, and this will be made available on the UNFCCC website. The Co-Chairs will report back to the forum on the meeting of the KCI.
			30.	The provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda for each meeting shall be transmitted to the members of the KCI at least four weeks in advance of the meeting.
			31.	Members may propose additions or changes to the provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda, in writing, to the secretariat within one week of receiving the documents, and these additions or changes shall be considered for a revised provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda by the secretariat in agreement with the Co-Chairs.
			32.	The secretariat shall transmit the provisional agenda and provisional annotated agenda and any supporting documentation to the members at least two weeks prior to a meeting. Documents may be transmitted after that date with the approval of the Co-Chairs.
			33.	Documents for a meeting shall be published on the UNFCCC website at least two weeks prior to that meeting, to the extent possible.
			34.	The KCI shall, at the beginning of each meeting, adopt the agenda for that meeting.
			35.	The CMA decided that members of the KCI shall prepare an annual report for consideration by the forum with a view to making recommendations for consideration by the SBSTA and the SBI, which, in turn, are to recommend actions to the Conference of the Parties (COP), the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) and the CMA for their consideration and adoption.
			36.	The annual report shall be made available on the UNFCCC website before the relevant sessions of the COP, the CMP and the CMA.
		IX.	Decision-making
			37.	The CMA decided that the KCI shall operate on the basis of consensus of its members.
			38.	The KCI may use electronic means to facilitate its work, as appropriate and in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI.
		X.	Working language
			39.	The working language of the KCI shall be English.
		XI.	Participation of expert advisers in meetings
			40.	The KCI, in fulfilling its mandate, should draw upon outside expertise at its meetings.
			41.	The Co-Chairs may, in consultation with the KCI, invite representatives of international organizations, the private sector, academia and/or civil society to participate in a meeting of the KCI as expert advisers on specific issues under consideration at the meeting.
		XII.	Participation of observers
			42.	The CMA decided that meetings of the KCI shall be open to attendance as observers by all Parties and accredited observer organizations, unless otherwise decided by the KCI.
			43.	The KCI may decide to close a meeting or part thereof to observers at any time.
			44.	The secretariat shall make the dates and venues of the meetings available to the public to enable participation by observers.
			45.	Observers may, with the agreement of the KCI, be invited to address the KCI on matters under consideration by the KCI. The Co-Chairs shall notify the KCI one week in advance of the meeting of any proposed interventions by observers.
			46.	The KCI may request interventions from observers throughout the meeting, as appropriate.
		XIII.	Use of electronic means of communication
			47.	The KCI shall use electronic means of communication to facilitate intersessional work, as appropriate and in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI. The secretariat shall ensure that a secure and dedicated web interface is established and maintained to facilitate the work of the KCI.
		XIV.	Working groups
			48.	The KCI may establish working groups among its members to support the forum in performing its functions. The working groups may receive inputs from experts, practitioners and relevant organizations in accordance with the workplan of the forum and its KCI and in line with paragraphs 40–41 above.
		XV.	Workplan
			49.	The KCI will support the work of the forum in line with the workplan of the forum and its KCI.
		XVI.	Amendments to the rules of procedure
			50.	The KCI may recommend amendments to these rules of procedure for consideration by the forum and approval by the subsidiary bodies.
			51.	Proposals and amendments to proposals for the rules of procedure may be introduced and submitted to the secretariat in writing by KCI members; such proposals and amendments shall be circulated for consideration by all members of the KCI.
			52.	No proposal for the rules of procedure shall be discussed or put forward for a decision at any meeting unless copies have been circulated to the KCI members no later than two weeks before the meeting.
		XVII.	Overriding authority of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement
			53.	In the event of a conflict between any provision of these rules and any provision of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol or the Paris Agreement, the provision of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol or the Paris Agreement shall take precedence.
			Document information
				| Version | Description |
				| Version 2 | Revision of paragraph 7 and addition of paragraph 11 |
				| Version 1 | Adopted by decisions 4/CP.25, 4/CMA.15 and 4/CMA.2 |
				
					10th plenary meeting
13 November 2021
		Decision 8/CMP.16
		Programme budget for the biennium 2022–2023
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
			Recalling Article 13, paragraph 5, of the Kyoto Protocol,
			Taking note of decision 22/CP.26 on the programme budget for the biennium 2022–2023, in particular paragraph 1,
			Having considered the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2022–2023 prepared by the Executive Secretary,
			1.	Endorses decision 22/CP.26 on the programme budget for the biennium 2022–2023 as it applies to the Kyoto Protocol;
			2.	Adopts the indicative scale of contributions contained in the annex;
			3.	Notes that the indicative scale of contributions covers 11 per cent of the contributions specified in table 1 of the decision referred to in paragraph 1 above;
			4.	Invites all Parties to the Kyoto Protocol to note that each Party shall, prior to 1 January of each year, inform the secretariat of the contribution it intends to make that year and of the projected timing of that contribution in accordance with paragraph 8(a) of the UNFCCC financial procedures, and that contributions to the core budget are due on 1 January of each year in accordance with paragraph 8(b) of the financial procedures, and to pay promptly and in full, for each of the years 2022 and 2023, the contributions required to finance the expenditures approved in paragraph 1 above;
			5.	Takes note of the funding arrangements for the clean development mechanism and joint implementation.
			
	Annex
	Indicative scale of contributions from Parties to the Kyoto Protocol for 2022–2023
		| Party | United Nations scale of assessments for 2019–2021 | Kyoto Protocol adjusted scale for 2022–2023 |
		| Afghanistan | 0.007 | 0.009 |
		| Albania | 0.008 | 0.010 |
		| Algeria | 0.138 | 0.179 |
		| Angola | 0.010 | 0.013 |
		| Antigua and Barbuda | 0.002 | 0.003 |
		| Argentina | 0.915 | 1.186 |
		| Armenia | 0.007 | 0.009 |
		| Australia | 2.210 | 2.863 |
		| Austria | 0.677 | 0.877 |
		| Azerbaijan | 0.049 | 0.063 |
		| Bahamas | 0.018 | 0.023 |
		| Bahrain | 0.050 | 0.065 |
		| Bangladesh | 0.010 | 0.013 |
		| Barbados | 0.007 | 0.009 |
		| Belarus | 0.049 | 0.063 |
		| Belgium | 0.821 | 1.064 |
		| Belize | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Benin | 0.003 | 0.004 |
		| Bhutan | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Bolivia (Plurinational State of) | 0.016 | 0.021 |
		| Bosnia and Herzegovina | 0.012 | 0.016 |
		| Botswana | 0.014 | 0.018 |
		| Brazil | 2.948 | 3.820 |
		| Brunei Darussalam | 0.025 | 0.032 |
		| Bulgaria | 0.046 | 0.060 |
		| Burkina Faso | 0.003 | 0.004 |
		| Burundi | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Cabo Verde | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Cambodia | 0.006 | 0.008 |
		| Cameroon | 0.013 | 0.017 |
		| Central African Republic | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Chad | 0.004 | 0.005 |
		| Chile | 0.407 | 0.527 |
		| China | 12.005 | 15.555 |
		| Colombia | 0.288 | 0.373 |
		| Comoros | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Congo | 0.006 | 0.008 |
		| Cook Islands | 0.000 | 0.001 |
		| Costa Rica | 0.062 | 0.080 |
		| Côte d’Ivoire | 0.013 | 0.017 |
		| Croatia | 0.077 | 0.100 |
		| Cuba | 0.080 | 0.104 |
		| Cyprus | 0.036 | 0.047 |
		| Czechia | 0.311 | 0.403 |
		| Democratic People’s Republic of Korea | 0.006 | 0.008 |
		| Democratic Republic of the Congo | 0.010 | 0.013 |
		| Denmark | 0.554 | 0.718 |
		| Djibouti | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Dominica | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Dominican Republic | 0.053 | 0.069 |
		| Ecuador | 0.080 | 0.104 |
		| Egypt | 0.186 | 0.241 |
		| El Salvador | 0.012 | 0.016 |
		| Equatorial Guinea | 0.016 | 0.021 |
		| Eritrea | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Estonia | 0.039 | 0.051 |
		| Eswatini | 0.002 | 0.003 |
		| Ethiopia | 0.010 | 0.013 |
		| European Union | 0.000 | 2.500 |
		| Fiji | 0.003 | 0.004 |
		| Finland | 0.421 | 0.545 |
		| France | 4.427 | 5.736 |
		| Gabon | 0.015 | 0.019 |
		| Gambia | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Georgia | 0.008 | 0.010 |
		| Germany | 6.090 | 7.891 |
		| Ghana | 0.015 | 0.019 |
		| Greece | 0.366 | 0.474 |
		| Grenada | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Guatemala | 0.036 | 0.047 |
		| Guinea | 0.003 | 0.004 |
		| Guinea-Bissau | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Guyana | 0.002 | 0.003 |
		| Haiti | 0.003 | 0.004 |
		| Honduras | 0.009 | 0.012 |
		| Hungary | 0.206 | 0.267 |
		| Iceland | 0.028 | 0.036 |
		| India | 0.834 | 1.081 |
		| Indonesia | 0.543 | 0.704 |
		| Iran (Islamic Republic of) | 0.398 | 0.516 |
		| Iraq | 0.129 | 0.167 |
		| Ireland | 0.371 | 0.481 |
		| Israel | 0.490 | 0.635 |
		| Italy | 3.307 | 4.285 |
		| Jamaica | 0.008 | 0.010 |
		| Japan | 8.564 | 11.096 |
		| Jordan | 0.021 | 0.027 |
		| Kazakhstan | 0.178 | 0.231 |
		| Kenya | 0.024 | 0.031 |
		| Kiribati | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Kuwait | 0.252 | 0.327 |
		| Kyrgyzstan | 0.002 | 0.003 |
		| Lao People’s Democratic Republic | 0.005 | 0.006 |
		| Latvia | 0.047 | 0.061 |
		| Lebanon | 0.047 | 0.061 |
		| Lesotho | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Liberia | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Libya | 0.030 | 0.039 |
		| Liechtenstein | 0.009 | 0.012 |
		| Lithuania | 0.071 | 0.092 |
		| Luxembourg | 0.067 | 0.087 |
		| Madagascar | 0.004 | 0.005 |
		| Malawi | 0.002 | 0.003 |
		| Malaysia | 0.341 | 0.442 |
		| Maldives | 0.004 | 0.005 |
		| Mali | 0.004 | 0.005 |
		| Malta | 0.017 | 0.022 |
		| Marshall Islands | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Mauritania | 0.002 | 0.003 |
		| Mauritius | 0.011 | 0.014 |
		| Mexico | 1.292 | 1.674 |
		| Micronesia (Federated States of) | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Monaco | 0.011 | 0.014 |
		| Mongolia | 0.005 | 0.006 |
		| Montenegro | 0.004 | 0.005 |
		| Morocco | 0.055 | 0.071 |
		| Mozambique | 0.004 | 0.005 |
		| Myanmar | 0.010 | 0.013 |
		| Namibia | 0.009 | 0.012 |
		| Nauru | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Nepal | 0.007 | 0.009 |
		| Netherlands | 1.356 | 1.757 |
		| New Zealand | 0.291 | 0.377 |
		| Nicaragua | 0.005 | 0.006 |
		| Niger | 0.002 | 0.003 |
		| Nigeria | 0.250 | 0.324 |
		| Niue | 0.000 | 0.001 |
		| North Macedonia | 0.007 | 0.009 |
		| Norway | 0.754 | 0.977 |
		| Oman | 0.115 | 0.149 |
		| Pakistan | 0.115 | 0.149 |
		| Palau | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Panama | 0.045 | 0.058 |
		| Papua New Guinea | 0.010 | 0.013 |
		| Paraguay | 0.016 | 0.021 |
		| Peru | 0.152 | 0.197 |
		| Philippines | 0.205 | 0.266 |
		| Poland | 0.802 | 1.039 |
		| Portugal | 0.350 | 0.453 |
		| Qatar | 0.282 | 0.365 |
		| Republic of Korea | 2.267 | 2.937 |
		| Republic of Moldova | 0.003 | 0.004 |
		| Romania | 0.198 | 0.257 |
		| Russian Federation | 2.405 | 3.116 |
		| Rwanda | 0.003 | 0.004 |
		| Saint Kitts and Nevis | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Saint Lucia | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Saint Vincent and the Grenadines | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Samoa | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| San Marino | 0.002 | 0.003 |
		| Sao Tome and Principe | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Saudi Arabia | 1.172 | 1.519 |
		| Senegal | 0.007 | 0.009 |
		| Serbia | 0.028 | 0.036 |
		| Seychelles | 0.002 | 0.003 |
		| Sierra Leone | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Singapore | 0.485 | 0.628 |
		| Slovakia | 0.153 | 0.198 |
		| Slovenia | 0.076 | 0.098 |
		| Solomon Islands | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Somalia | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| South Africa | 0.272 | 0.352 |
		| Spain | 2.146 | 2.781 |
		| Sri Lanka | 0.044 | 0.057 |
		| Sudan | 0.010 | 0.013 |
		| Suriname | 0.005 | 0.006 |
		| Sweden | 0.906 | 1.174 |
		| Switzerland | 1.151 | 1.491 |
		| Syrian Arab Republic | 0.011 | 0.014 |
		| Tajikistan | 0.004 | 0.005 |
		| Thailand | 0.307 | 0.398 |
		| Timor-Leste | 0.002 | 0.003 |
		| Togo | 0.002 | 0.003 |
		| Tonga | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Trinidad and Tobago | 0.040 | 0.052 |
		| Tunisia | 0.025 | 0.032 |
		| Turkey | 1.371 | 1.776 |
		| Turkmenistan | 0.033 | 0.043 |
		| Tuvalu | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Uganda | 0.008 | 0.010 |
		| Ukraine | 0.057 | 0.074 |
		| United Arab Emirates | 0.616 | 0.798 |
		| United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland | 4.567 | 5.917 |
		| United Republic of Tanzania | 0.010 | 0.013 |
		| Uruguay | 0.087 | 0.113 |
		| Uzbekistan | 0.032 | 0.041 |
		| Vanuatu | 0.001 | 0.001 |
		| Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) | 0.728 | 0.943 |
		| Viet Nam | 0.077 | 0.100 |
		| Yemen | 0.010 | 0.013 |
		| Zambia | 0.009 | 0.012 |
		| Zimbabwe | 0.005 | 0.006 |
		| Total | 100.000 | 100.000 |
		
			9th plenary meeting
11 November 2021
		Decision 9/CMP.16
		Budget for the international transaction log
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
			Recalling Article 13, paragraph 5, of the Kyoto Protocol,
			Also recalling decisions 11/CMP.3, 10/CMP.5, 9/CMP.6, 8/CMP.8, 8/CMP.11, 7/CMP.13 and 5/CMP.15,
			Recognizing the importance of sufficient and stable funding for the international transaction log,
			Also recognizing the importance of the proper functioning of the international transaction log for the Parties listed in Annex B to the Kyoto Protocol, as contained in annex I to decision 1/CMP.8,
			1.	Approves the budget for the international transaction log for the biennium 2022–2023, amounting to EUR 3,851,948 for the purposes specified in the proposed budget for the international transaction log;
			2.	Decides to maintain the level of the working capital reserve at 8.3 per cent of the estimated expenditure for the Trust Fund for the International Transaction Log;
			3.	Authorizes the Executive Secretary to draw EUR 2.5 million from unspent balances of the Trust Fund for the International Transaction Log from previous financial periods to cover part of the budget for the biennium 2022–2023;
			4.	Also authorizes the Executive Secretary to draw funds from unspent balances of the Trust Fund for the International Transaction Log from previous financial periods to cover the potential shortfall in fees due to the disconnection of Parties from the international transaction log;
			5.	Notes that the action referred to in paragraph 3 above is exceptional and is needed to disburse the significant unspent funds and recognizes that fees for the operation of the international transaction log are to be levied as necessary in future bienniums;
			6.	Notes that any unspent balances of the Trust Fund for the International Transaction Log from previous financial periods remaining after the actions referred to in paragraphs 3–4 above could be used to cover the budget of the international transaction log for future bienniums;
			7.	Requests the administrator of the international transaction log to disclose in its annual reports the unspent balance of the Trust Fund for the International Transaction Log from the previous biennium as at the time of publication of the annual report;
			8.	Adopts the scale of fees for the international transaction log for the biennium 2022–2023 contained in the annex;
			9.	Decides that fees for the international transaction log paid by a Party for the biennium 2022–2023 shall be calculated by multiplying the scale of fees for that Party contained in the annex by the budget for the international transaction log for the biennium 2022–2023 and adjusted for Parties currently not connected to the international transaction log, taking into account the amount drawn from unspent balances as set out in paragraph 3 above, with the balance of fees for the first year of the biennium being equal to the balance of fees for the second year of the biennium, as contained in the annex;
			10.	Requests the Executive Secretary to notify Parties connected to the international transaction log in the biennium 2022–2023 of the annual fees, calculated in accordance with paragraph 9 above, as early as possible and at least four months in advance of the relevant calendar year, where possible;
			11.	Decides that, if a Party connects to the international transaction log for the first time or reconnects to it, the scale of fees for that Party shall be that contained in the annex, or, for Parties not listed in the table contained in the annex, shall be made equal to 130 per cent of their Kyoto Protocol adjusted scale for the relevant biennium;
			12.	Also decides that fees paid by a Party that connects to the international transaction log for the first time or reconnects to it shall be deducted from the resource requirement for activities relating to the international transaction log in the next biennium;
			13.	Further decides that fees paid by a Party that connects to the international transaction log for the first time or reconnects to it during the biennium 2022–2023 shall be proportioned for the period between the date of connection or reconnection of its registry and the end of the biennium, except for the period for which the fees were already paid;
			14.	Decides that, where a Party disconnects during the biennium 2022–2023, the Party shall cover the fees for the full year in which the disconnection took place, and that, if the disconnection takes place in the first year of the biennium and the Party does not reconnect in the second year of the biennium, fees for the second year of the biennium shall not apply;
			15.	Also decides that, where a Party disconnected prior to the biennium 2022–2023, the fees shall not apply until the Party reconnects to the international transaction log;
			16.	Authorizes the international transaction log administrator to disconnect the registry of a Party from the international transaction log in the event of the non-payment of fees by that Party, provided that such disconnection shall not be effected earlier than four months after the beginning of the relevant calendar year, at least two reminders have already been given to the Party and consultations have taken place with the Party concerned prior to the final reminder;
			17.	Requests the international transaction log administrator to provide, in its annual reports for 2022 and 2023, information on transactions of Kyoto Protocol units;
			18.	Also requests the international transaction log administrator to publish, in its annual reports, a table listing the scale and the level of fees and the status of payments for all Parties connected to the international transaction log.
			
	Annex
	Fees for the international transaction log for the biennium 2022–2023
		| Party | Scale of fees for 2022–2023
(%) | Calculated fees for 2022 before credit from unspent balances
(EUR) | Calculated fees for 2023 before credit from unspent balances
(EUR) | Balance of fees for 2022 after credit from unspent balances
(EUR) | Balance of fees for 2023 after credit from unspent balances
(EUR) |
		| Australia | 2.841 | 56 204 | 56 204 | 19 726 | 19 726 |
		| Austria | 1.588 | 31 422 | 31 422 | 11 029 | 11 029 |
		| Belarusa | 0.073 | – | – | – | – |
		| Belgium | 1.973 | 39 035 | 39 035 | 13 700 | 13 700 |
		| Bulgaria | 0.036 | 703 | 703 | 247 | 247 |
		| Croatia | 0.079 | 1 572 | 1 572 | 552 | 552 |
		| Cyprus | 0.061 | 1 207 | 1 207 | 424 | 424 |
		| Czechia | 0.503 | 9 950 | 9 950 | 3 492 | 3 492 |
		| Denmark | 1.323 | 26 168 | 26 168 | 9 184 | 9 184 |
		| Estonia | 0.028 | 559 | 559 | 196 | 196 |
		| European Union | 2.685 | 53 122 | 53 122 | 18 645 | 18 645 |
		| Finland | 1.009 | 19 962 | 19 962 | 7 006 | 7 006 |
		| France | 10.667 | 211 061 | 211 061 | 74 078 | 74 078 |
		| Germany | 15.35 | 303 714 | 303 714 | 106 597 | 106 597 |
		| Greece | 1.065 | 21 079 | 21 079 | 7 398 | 7 398 |
		| Hungary | 0.437 | 8 647 | 8 647 | 3 035 | 3 035 |
		| Iceland | 0.737 | 14 584 | 14 584 | 5 119 | 5 119 |
		| Ireland | 0.797 | 15 763 | 15 763 | 5 532 | 5 532 |
		| Italy | 9.090 | 179 847 | 179 847 | 63 122 | 63 122 |
		| Japan | 14.939 | 295 585 | 295 585 | 103 744 | 103 744 |
		| Kazakhstana | 0.157 | – | – | – | – |
		| Latvia | 0.032 | 641 | 641 | 225 | 225 |
		| Liechtenstein | 0.188 | 3 724 | 3 724 | 1 307 | 1 307 |
		| Lithuania | 0.055 | 1 096 | 1 096 | 385 | 385 |
		| Luxembourg | 0.153 | 3 020 | 3 020 | 1 060 | 1 060 |
		| Malta | 0.021 | 416 | 416 | 146 | 146 |
		| Monaco | 0.181 | 3 579 | 3 579 | 1 256 | 1 256 |
		| Netherlands | 3.352 | 66 320 | 66 320 | 23 277 | 23 277 |
		| New Zealand | 0.961 | 19 011 | 19 011 | 6 672 | 6 672 |
		| Norway | 2.319 | 45 882 | 45 882 | 16 104 | 16 104 |
		| Poland | 0.896 | 17 728 | 17 728 | 6 222 | 6 222 |
		| Portugal | 0.943 | 18 659 | 18 659 | 6 549 | 6 549 |
		| Romania | 0.125 | 2 482 | 2 482 | 871 | 871 |
		| Russian Federationa | 2.743 | – | – | – | – |
		| Slovakia | 0.113 | 2 234 | 2 234 | 784 | 784 |
		| Slovenia | 0.171 | 3 393 | 3 393 | 1 191 | 1 191 |
		| Spain | 5.311 | 105 086 | 105 086 | 36 883 | 36 883 |
		| Sweden | 1.917 | 37 938 | 37 938 | 13 316 | 13 316 |
		| Switzerland | 2.760 | 54 611 | 54 611 | 19 167 | 19 167 |
		| Ukraine | 0.745 | 14 749 | 14 749 | 5 177 | 5 177 |
		| United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland | 11.888 | 235 221 | 235 221 | 82 556 | 82 556 |
		| Fees | – | 1 925 974 | 1 925 974 | 675 974 | 675 974 |
		| Credit from unspent balances from previous financial periods | – | – | – | 1 250 000 | 1 250 000 |
		| Total | – | 1 925 974 | 1 925 974 | 1 925 974 | 1 925 974 |
		
			a   Currently not connected to the international transaction log; will be subject to the international transaction log fees in the case of connection or reconnection to it, in accordance with paras. 11 and 13 of this decision.
			9th plenary meeting
11 November 2021
		Decision 10/CMP.16
		Administrative, financial and institutional matters
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
			Recalling Article 13, paragraph 5, of the Kyoto Protocol,
			Also recalling the UNFCCC financial procedures, which apply to the Kyoto Protocol,
				Taking note of decision 23/CP.26,
			Having considered the information contained in the documents prepared by the secretariat on administrative, financial and institutional matters,
		I.	Budget performance for the bienniums 2018–2019 and 2020–2021
			1.	Takes note of the information contained in the reports on budget performance for the bienniums 2018–2019 (as at 31 December 2019) and 2020–2021 (as at 31 December 2020) and the note on the status of contributions to the trust funds administered by the secretariat as at 22 October 2021;
			2.	Expresses its appreciation to Parties that made contributions to the core budget in a timely manner;
			3.	Expresses concern regarding the high level of outstanding contributions to the core budget for the current and previous bienniums, which has resulted in difficulties with cash flow and the effective implementation of activities;
			4.	Strongly urges Parties that have not made contributions in full to the core budget for the current and/or previous bienniums to do so without further delay;
			5.	Calls upon Parties to make their contributions to the core budget for 2022 in a timely manner, bearing in mind that contributions are due on 1 January of each year in accordance with the UNFCCC financial procedures;
			6.	Expresses its appreciation for the contributions to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process and to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities received from Parties, including those contributions that allow for greater flexibility in allocation;
			7.	Urges Parties to further contribute to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process in order to ensure the widest possible participation in the process in 2022–2023, and to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities to ensure a high level of implementation of the UNFCCC work programme;
			8.	Reiterates its appreciation to the Government of Germany for its annual voluntary contribution to the core budget of EUR 766,938 and its special contribution of EUR 1,789,522 as Host Government of the secretariat;
			9.	Requests the Executive Secretary to take further measures to reduce Parties’ outstanding contributions;
			10.	Also requests the Executive Secretary to prepare annual budget performance reports covering 12 and 24 months of the biennium, respectively;
		II.	Audit reports and financial statements for 2019 and 2020
			11.	Takes note of the audit reports of the United Nations Board of Auditors and the financial statements for 2019 and 2020, which include recommendations, and the comments of the secretariat thereon;
			12.	Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations for arranging the audit of the accounts of the Convention;
			13.	Also expresses its appreciation to the auditors for their valuable observations and recommendations and the written statement thereon shared with Parties at the fifty-second to fifty-fifth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation;
			14.	Expresses concern about the high number of recommendations from the United Nations Board of Auditors not yet implemented by the secretariat;
			15.	Urges the Executive Secretary to implement the recommendations of the auditors, as appropriate, and to update Parties on progress;
		III.	Other financial and budgetary matters
			16.	Takes note of the information contained in the documents prepared by the secretariat on other financial and budgetary matters, including on efforts to further improve the efficiency and transparency of the UNFCCC budget process and on standard costs;
			17.	Reiterates the request to the Executive Secretary to prepare, regularly update and publish before each session of the subsidiary bodies brief reports on standard costs and, if available, options for reducing the cost of activities where practicable;
			18.	Welcomes the information on standard travel costs provided by the secretariat;
			19.	Recommends that the secretariat publish and regularly update information on standard costs on the UNFCCC website (instead of the brief update reports) and inform Parties in a timely and clear manner when new information is available (at least before each session of the subsidiary bodies);
			20.	States that the purpose of reporting on standard costs is to provide Parties with insight into the budgetary impact of any planned decisions of the governing bodies;
			21.	Welcomes the proposed measures for improving the efficiency and transparency of the UNFCCC budget process;
			22.	Requests the secretariat to report on the implementation of those measures in the report on efforts to improve the efficiency and transparency of the UNFCCC budget process;
			23.	Acknowledges the increase in unearmarked contributions in relation to earmarked contributions to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities;
			24.	Also acknowledges that reducing earmarking and establishing longer and more flexible utilization periods would increase flexibility in using contributions to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities, which would enable the secretariat to allocate funding to the activities most in need of resources;
			25.	Appreciates the approach taken by the Executive Secretary to presenting supplementary resource requirements by overall objective and thematic area while also enclosing a list of projects;
			26.	Requests the secretariat to enhance follow-up on Parties’ outstanding core contributions, including through payment plans;
			27.	Decides to keep the level of the working capital reserve at 8.3 per cent of annual total expenditure (in line with the UNFCCC financial procedures);
			28.	Requests the secretariat to inform Parties of the review and prioritization criteria for unearmarked contributions to ensure that they are allocated to activities in line with the secretariat’s work programme and the priorities set by Parties.
				9th plenary meeting
11 November 2021
	Resolution 1/CMP.16
		Expression of gratitude to the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the people of the city of Glasgow
			Resolution submitted by the Arab Republic of Egypt
				The Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
				Having met in Glasgow from 31 October to 13 November 2021,
				1.	Express their profound gratitude to the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland for having made it possible for the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties, the sixteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the third session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to be held in Glasgow;
				2.	Request the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to convey to the city and people of Glasgow the gratitude of the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement for the hospitality and warmth extended to the participants.
					10th plenary meeting
13 November 2021
				
