|  | United Nations | FCCC/KP/CMP/2014/9/Add.1 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 2 February 2015  Original: English |

Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting
of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol
Report of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol on its tenth session, held in Lima from 1 to 14 December 2014
	Addendum
Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its tenth session
	Contents
Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol
	Decision	Page
	1/CMP.10	Report of the Adaptation Fund Board		2
	2/CMP.10	Second review of the Adaptation Fund		11
		3/CMP.10	Date of the completion of the expert review process under Article 8 
of the Kyoto Protocol for the first commitment period		13
	4/CMP.10	Guidance relating to the clean development mechanism		15
	5/CMP.10	Guidance on the implementation of Article 6 of the Kyoto Protocol		21
		6/CMP.10	Synergy relating to accreditation under the mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol		23
	7/CMP.10	Outcome of the work programme on modalities and procedures for possible
				additional land use, land-use change and forestry activities under the clean
				development mechanism		24
	8/CMP.10	Administrative, financial and institutional matters		25
		Resolution
		1/CMP.10	Expression of gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Peru 
and the people of the city of Lima		27
Decision 1/CMP.10
Report of the Adaptation Fund Board
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
	Welcoming the report of the Adaptation Fund Board,
	Noting with concern the level of market prices for certified emission reductions and their expected impact on the availability of funding from the Adaptation Fund and on its ability to fulfil its mandate,
	1.	Adopts the amendment to the terms and conditions of services to be provided by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank) as trustee for the Adaptation Fund, on an interim basis, contained in the annex;
	2.	Notes the following information, actions and decisions relating to the Adaptation Fund Board contained in the report of the Adaptation Fund Board and the oral report made by the Chair of the Adaptation Fund Board in December 2014:
	(a)	The accreditation of 17 national implementing entities that can directly access resources from the Adaptation Fund, including one accredited during the reporting period; and the accreditation of four regional implementing entities, including two during the reporting period;
	(b)	Cumulative project and programme approvals reaching USD 264.8 million as at November 2014;
	(c)	Approval of the environmental and social policy of the Adaptation Fund;
	(d)	Approval of the readiness programme for direct access to climate finance, launched on 1 May 2014, and of its execution arrangements and eligibility criteria for the allocation of funds to accredited implementing entities for specific activities;
	(e)	Approval of one annual intersessional project/programme review cycle during an intersessional period of 24 weeks or more between two consecutive Board meetings;
	(f)	Approval of 16 project/programme proposals, totalling USD 80.6 million, submitted by implementing entities from July 2013 to November 2014, including 10 proposals submitted by national implementing entities totalling USD 43.2 million;
	(f)	Establishment of a new fundraising target of USD 80 million per calendar year in 2014 and 2015;
	3.	Also notes the cumulative receipts of USD 407.9 million into the Adaptation Fund Trust Fund;
	4.	Further notes that the pledges have surpassed the initial fundraising target set by the Adaptation Fund Board of USD 100 million for the calendar years 2012 and 2013;
	5.	Urges those developed country Parties that responded to the initial fundraising target of the Adaptation Fund Board but have not completed the process to do so at their earliest opportunity;
	6.	Welcomes the target for the resource mobilization strategy set by the Adaptation Fund Board of USD 80 million per calendar year in 2014 and 2015;
	7.	Continues to encourage Parties included in Annex I to the Convention to provide funding to support the target referred to in paragraph 6 above and to scale up funding, with a view to the resource mobilization goal of the Board being reached from resources that are additional to the share of proceeds from clean development mechanism project activities, the first international transfers of assigned amount units and the issuance of emission reduction units for activities under Article 6 of the Kyoto Protocol;
		8.	Welcomes the financial contributions that have been made to the Adaptation Fund in 2014 and the pledge of EUR 50 million made by Germany towards the target referred to in paragraph 6 above;
		9.	Invites further support for the readiness programme of the Adaptation Fund Board for direct access to climate finance in accordance with decision 2/CMP.10, paragraph 5;
		10.	Requests the Adaptation Fund Board, in its future reports to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, to provide further clarity on the effect of the fluctuation of the price of certified emission reductions and the impact of this fluctuation on the resources available to the Fund;
		11.	Also requests the Adaptation Fund Board to continue its work on options for permanent institutional arrangements for the secretariat and the trustee, including via an open and competitive bidding process for the selection of a permanent trustee for the Adaptation Fund on the basis of the cost and time frame of each option and its legal and financial implications in order to ensure there is no discontinuity of the trustee service.
		
	
Annex
	Amended and restated terms and conditions of services to be provided by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development as trustee for the Adaptation Fund
I.	Recitals
(a)	A clean development mechanism (CDM) was established under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(the Convention) (the Kyoto Protocol).
(b)	The Conference of the Parties decided in its decision 10/CP.7 that an adaptation fund (the Adaptation Fund) shall be established to finance concrete adaptation projects and programmes in developing country Parties that are Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, as well as activities identified in decision 5/CP.7, paragraph 8.
(c)	The decision was further endorsed by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) through its decision 28/CMP.1.
(d)	In decision 1/CMP.3, the CMP decided that the Adaptation Fund shall finance concrete adaptation projects and programmes that are country driven and are based on the needs, views and priorities of eligible Parties, and that the Adaptation Fund Board shall be established as the operating entity of the Adaptation Fund.
(e)	The CMP, in its decision 1/CMP.3, invited the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank) to serve as the trustee for the Adaptation Fund (the World Bank in such capacity, the Trustee) on an interim basis, and requested the Adaptation Fund Board to present the necessary legal arrangements to be concluded between the CMP and the trustee, for adoption by the CMP at its fourth session.
(f)	The CMP and the World Bank concluded the legal arrangements necessary for the World Bank to serve as Trustee on an interim basis by way of adopting and accepting the terms and conditions of services to be provided by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development as trustee for the Adaptation Fund (the Terms and Conditions) as contained in the appendix to annex III to decision 1/CMP.4.
(g)	The Terms and Conditions were amended twice to extend the term of the Trustee’s services thereunder on an interim basis, as set out in decision 5/CMP.6, paragraph 1, and decision 1/CMP.9, paragraph 1.
(h)	The CMP, in its decision 1/CMP.9, requested the Adaptation Fund Board to develop and approve the legal arrangements with the trustee regarding the services for the 2 per cent share of proceeds levied in accordance with decision 1/CMP.8, paragraph 21, for approval by the CMP.
(i)	The Adaptation Fund Board has developed and approved the legal arrangements with the Trustee for approval by the CMP, which are proposed to be concluded between the CMP and the Trustee by amending and restating the Terms and Conditions.
(j)	The CMP and the World Bank wish to amend and restate the Terms and Conditions as follows.
II.	Terms and conditions
	A.	Role and responsibilities of the Trustee
	1.	The World Bank shall act as the Trustee on an interim basis in accordance with the Terms and Conditions set forth herein.
	2.	The Trustee shall comply with the principles and modalities for operations stipulated in the relevant decisions of the CMP and decisions of the Adaptation Fund Board. The Trustee shall be closely consulted in the development of decisions, taken by the CMP or the Adaptation Fund Board after the effective date of the Terms and Conditions, which relate in any way to the functions of the Trustee performed or to be performed, and the Terms and Conditions stipulated below shall be applicable. The Trustee shall perform its functions under the Terms and Conditions in accordance with the applicable provisions of the World Bank’s Articles of Agreement, by-laws, policies and procedures.
	3.	The CMP hereby: (1) confirms its designation, under its decision 1/CMP.3, of the Adaptation Fund Board as its designee and delegatee in respect of the Adaptation Fund, acting under the authority and guidance of the CMP; and (2) imbues the Adaptation Fund Board with the capacity, power and authority to render decisions and provide instructions, directions and guidance to the Trustee hereunder and to cause to be effectuated the sale or disposal, for the purpose of monetization (Sale), of certified emission reductions (CERs), assigned amount units (AAUs) or emission reduction units (ERUs) collected as the share of proceeds for the Adaptation Fund (any such CERs, AAUs or ERUs, hereinafter referred to individually or collectively as the Share of Proceeds), pursuant to paragraphs 24–28 below.
	4.	The Trustee, in the performance of its functions under the Terms and Conditions, shall be accountable to the Adaptation Fund Board.
	5.	Without prejudice to any other provisions of the Terms and Conditions, the Trustee shall, in performing its functions under the Terms and Conditions, act upon decisions, instructions, directions or guidance of the CMP or the Adaptation Fund Board (or such other person designated in writing by the Adaptation Fund Board for that purpose (Authorized Designee)) only if such decisions, instructions, directions or guidance are provided to the Trustee in writing. The Trustee shall not be responsible for inquiring or investigating if any decisions, instructions, directions or guidance of the Adaptation Fund Board or, as the case may be, any Authorized Designees, do not contravene an existing decision or act of the CMP, and shall have no liability for relying in good faith on any written decision, instruction, direction or guidance of the CMP, Adaptation Fund Board or any Authorized Designees, without further inquiry or investigation on its part or otherwise for any actions taken, or omitted to be taken, in good faith.
	6.	The CMP acknowledges that the Trustee may disclose information obtained by it in connection with its functions under the Terms and Conditions, if such disclosure is required or otherwise necessary in carrying out the services and activities set out herein, in accordance with the World Bank’s policies and procedures.
	7.	The Trustee shall establish a trust fund for the Adaptation Fund (the Trust Fund), and shall hold in trust, as a legal owner, and administer the funds, assets and receipts, which constitute the Trust Fund, on behalf of the Adaptation Fund supervised and managed by the Adaptation Fund Board.
	8.	For the purpose of the monetization of the Share of Proceeds for the Adaptation Fund, the Trustee, in its capacity as agent of the CMP, is hereby authorized by the CMP to administer Sales of the Share of Proceeds under the instructions, direction and guidance of the Adaptation Fund Board consistent with its responsibility for the monetization of the Share of Proceeds, pursuant to paragraphs 24–28 below.
	9.	The Trustee shall be responsible only for performing those duties and responsibilities specifically and expressly set forth in the Terms and Conditions and shall not be subject to any other duties or responsibilities (express or implied), including, without limitation, any duties or obligations that might otherwise apply to a fiduciary or trustee under general principles of equity, trust or fiduciary obligations and/or any other legal or equitable principles. To the extent that Sales of the Share of Proceeds are conducted by the Trustee pursuant to paragraphs 24–28 below, the Trustee shall not be responsible for the legality, validity or enforceability of any such Sales of the Share of Proceeds, the value obtained from such Sales of the Share of Proceeds (including any reduction in the value of the CERs, AAUs or the ERUs from the time they are credited to the CDM Account (as defined in paragraph 24 below) to the time such Sales are consummated) or any expenses or liabilities incurred in connection with such Sales.
	10.	The Trustee shall not be liable for any failure to carry out its obligations under the Terms and Conditions where such failure is a result of a Force Majeure Event and, for so long as such circumstances continue, shall be relieved of its obligations under the Terms and Conditions which it has been prevented from fulfilling as a result of that Force Majeure Event without liability; provided that the Trustee shall, notwithstanding that it is relieved from its obligations hereunder, take all reasonable and practical steps to minimize any loss and/or disruption resulting from any such Force Majeure Event. For the purpose of this paragraph, “Force Majeure Event” means any event beyond the reasonable control of the person affected including, without limitation, labour dispute, act of God, war, act or circumstance of terrorism, riot, civil commotion, malicious damage, accident, breakdown of essential computer software, hardware or system failure, fire, flood and/or storm and other unforeseen circumstances materially and adversely affecting the performance of the functions of the Trustee under the Terms and Conditions.
	11.	The CMP acknowledges that the World Bank shall have the right to engage in any of the types of activities described in the Terms and Conditions for its own account or for the account of clients other than the Adaptation Fund whether acting as trustee, adviser or in any other capacity vis-à-vis such clients. The CMP agrees that the World Bank, in carrying out such activities for its own account or for the account of others, may decide to adopt approaches and courses of actions, which differ from the approaches and courses of action that the Trustee decides to take in performing the services for the Adaptation Fund described in the Terms and Conditions. In engaging in such activities for its own account or for the account of others, the World Bank will put in place measures designed to avoid or mitigate conflicts of interest arising from its functions under the Terms and Conditions relating to the Sale of the Share of Proceeds for the Adaptation Fund.
	12.	If a decision by the CMP or the Adaptation Fund Board after the effective date of the Terms and Conditions relates to the functions of the Trustee performed or to be performed under the Terms and Conditions, such a decision shall be developed in close consultation with the Trustee. In the absence of such consultation with and the agreement of the Trustee, the Trustee shall not be bound by any decision of the CMP or the Adaptation Fund Board, to the extent that such a decision relates to the functions of the Trustee performed or to be performed under the Terms and Conditions.
	13.	The CMP agrees that the Trustee shall be fully indemnified, out of the assets held for the Adaptation Fund, including the Trust Fund resources, for any liabilities, claims, losses, costs and expenses, including attorneys’ fees and expenses, incurred by the Trustee in connection with or in any way arising out of its activities as Trustee, including but not limited to any activities of the Trustee in connection with the Sale or the facilitation of the Sale of the Share of Proceeds. Such indemnity shall not include any liabilities, claims, losses, costs or expenses incurred by the Trustee as a direct result of its own gross negligence or wilful misconduct.
	14.	The privileges and immunities accorded to the World Bank shall apply to the property, assets, archives, operations and transactions of the Trust Fund. Nothing in the Terms and Conditions shall be considered a waiver of any privileges or immunities of the World Bank under its Articles of Agreement or any applicable law, all of which are expressly reserved.
	15.	The CMP agrees that the Trustee shall be reimbursed annually from the assets held for the Adaptation Fund, including the Trust Fund resources, for the fees, costs and expenses incurred by it in connection with performing its functions under the Terms and Conditions, including, without limitation, the costs and expenses incurred in connection with the establishment and administration of the Trust Fund, the Sale of the Share of Proceeds, and any and all services provided hereunder, including attorneys’ fees and expenses and external auditors’ costs, costs of insurance policies and relevant service providers’ fees. For this purpose, the Trustee shall submit to the Adaptation Fund Board a proposal for mutual agreement for the services and activities to be provided by the Trustee and estimated fees, costs and expenses to carry out such services and activities for the initial and/or upcoming fiscal year, as applicable. Upon approval by the Adaptation Fund Board of such a proposal, the Trustee shall deduct and transfer the amount of the estimated fees, costs and expenses to its own account from the Trust Fund resources or such other assets held for the Adaptation Fund; provided that the amount of the fees, costs and expenses transferred may be subject to an end of year adjustment based on actual costs and expenses incurred, as such an arrangement may be agreed between the Adaptation Fund Board and the Trustee in connection with the aforementioned proposal.
	16.	In order to enable the Trustee to carry out its functions enumerated in the Terms and Conditions, the Trustee shall be entitled to attend any meetings of the Adaptation Fund Board and, as an observer, any meetings of the CMP which may concern the operations and activities of the Adaptation Fund. Further, the CMP hereby requests the secretariat servicing the Adaptation Fund Board in accordance with decision 1/CMP.3, and the secretariat of the Convention (the UNFCCC secretariat), to cooperate fully with the Trustee.
	B.	Administration of the Trust Fund
	17.	The Trustee shall receive and hold in the Trust Fund any proceeds from the Sale of the Share of Proceeds conducted pursuant to paragraphs 24–28 below. If requested by the Adaptation Fund Board, the Trustee may accept, on terms mutually agreed between the Trustee and the Adaptation Fund Board, contributions from donors to support the operations of the Adaptation Fund. For the avoidance of doubt, no Share of Proceeds shall be held in the Trust Fund.
	18.	Subject to paragraphs 2 and 12 above, the Trustee shall administer the funds, assets and receipts of the Trust Fund only for the purpose of, and in accordance with, the Terms and Conditions and the relevant decisions of the CMP and the Adaptation Fund Board.
	19.	In accordance with decision 1/CMP.3, paragraph 21, and in conformity with the administrative and investment arrangements of the Trustee, the Trustee shall hold the funds, assets and receipts that constitute the Trust Fund separate and apart from the funds of the World Bank. The Trustee shall establish and maintain separate records and accounts to identify the resources of the Trust Fund, the commitments financed out of the Trust Fund, and the receipts and transfers of funds in the Trust Fund.
	20.	The Trustee shall invest the funds held in the Trust Fund, pending their transfer under paragraphs 15 above and 22 below, in accordance with the Trustee’s policies and procedures for the investment of trust funds administered by the World Bank, including commingling of the resources of the Trust Fund for administrative and investment purposes with other trust fund assets maintained by the World Bank. The commingling of Trust Fund resources for administrative and investment purposes should not affect the amount of resources from proceeds of monetization of the Share of Proceeds available in the Trust Fund for transfer of funds for Adaptation Fund operations, activities, projects and programmes. The Trustee shall credit all income from such investment to the Trust Fund to be used for the same purposes as other funds held in the Trust Fund. The CMP acknowledges that no warranty is given by the Trustee as to the performance or profitability of the investment of the funds held in the Trust Fund.
	21.	The funds held in the Trust Fund may be freely exchanged by the Trustee into other currencies as may facilitate their administration and transfer.
	22.	The Trustee shall, subject to the availability of resources held in the Trust Fund, record commitments and make transfers of funds from the Trust Fund in the manner agreed between the Trustee and the Adaptation Fund Board, and only at, and in accordance with, the written direction provided to the Trustee by the Adaptation Fund Board or any Authorized Designee. Upon the transfer of funds, the Trustee shall not have any responsibility for the use of the Trust Fund funds transferred and activities carried out therewith, including but not limited to any responsibility with respect to supervising, monitoring, reporting on or verifying activities carried out with the Trust Fund funds transferred by the Trustee herein.
	23.	The Trustee shall prepare and furnish the Adaptation Fund Board with financial reports of the Trust Fund annually (or at any other such frequency agreed between the Trustee and the Adaptation Fund Board), and provide records and accounts of the Trust Fund for audit by its external auditors annually (or at any other such frequency agreed between the Trustee and the Adaptation Fund Board), in accordance with the policies and procedures of the Trustee. Furthermore, the Trustee shall prepare and furnish the Adaptation Fund Board with reports on the Sale of the Share of Proceeds for the Adaptation Fund and on the status of commitments and transfers of Trust Fund funds annually (or at any other such frequency agreed between the Trustee and the Adaptation Fund Board).
	C.	Sales of Share of Proceeds
	24.	The CMP hereby authorizes the Sale of the Share of Proceeds from the account established and maintained at the CDM registry for the Adaptation Fund to hold and transfer the Share of Proceeds to assist in meeting the costs of adaptation in accordance with Article 12, paragraph 8, of the Kyoto Protocol (the CDM Account) in the manner set forth hereunder.
	25.	The Sale of the Share of Proceeds from the CDM Account shall be administered under the instructions, direction and guidance of the Adaptation Fund Board consistent with its responsibility to supervise and manage the Adaptation Fund and for the monetization of the Share of Proceeds.
	26.	Pursuant to the authority provided under paragraph 3 above, the Adaptation Fund Board may cause to be entered into any and all contracts necessary for the Sale of the Share of Proceeds from the CDM Account by granting to the Trustee any necessary power of attorney on behalf of the CMP, so that the Trustee may execute contracts of Sale with the relevant third-party Share of Proceeds purchasers and such other contracts necessary in connection with the Sale or the facilitation of the Sale of the Share of Proceeds, at the direction of the Adaptation Fund Board pursuant to paragraph 28 below.
	27.	Pursuant to the authority provided under paragraph 8 above, and in furtherance of paragraphs 24–26 above, the Trustee may, at the direction of the Adaptation Fund Board pursuant to paragraph 28 below: (1) cause the transfer of the title to the Share of Proceeds to the relevant third-party purchasers, or the cancellation of the Share of Proceeds, upon receipt of payment in respect of the transfer or cancellation; (2) enter into arrangements with the CDM Registry Administrator to effectuate such transfers or cancellations of the Share of Proceeds; (3) engage with relevant service providers for the purposes of execution, clearance, settlement and other logistic matters in connection with the Sale or the facilitation of the Sale of the Share of Proceeds; and (4) take other such actions as necessary to effectuate the Sale of the Share of Proceeds for the benefit of the Adaptation Fund.
	28.	Sale of the Share of Proceeds and transfer of title or cancellation of the Share of Proceeds in respect of such Sale pursuant to paragraphs 24–27 above shall be effected by the Trustee only in accordance with the guidelines agreed in writing between the Trustee and the Adaptation Fund Board.
	D.	Dispute resolution: notices
	29.	The CMP and the Trustee shall, to the extent possible, strive to resolve promptly and amicably questions of interpretation and application of the Terms and Conditions and settle any disputes, controversy or claim arising out of or relating to the Terms and Conditions.
	30.	Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or relating to the Terms and Conditions, which has not been settled by agreement between the CMP and the Trustee, shall be submitted to arbitration in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) in force on the effective date of the Terms and Conditions, and the following provisions: (1) the appointing authority shall be the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration; and (2) the language of the arbitral proceedings shall be English.
	31.	Any arbitral award under paragraph 30 above shall be final and binding upon the CMP and the Trustee. The provisions set forth in paragraphs 29 and 30 above shall be in lieu of any other procedure for the settlement of disputes between the CMP and the Trustee.
	32.	Any notice or request required or permitted to be given or made under the Terms and Conditions and any other agreement between any of the parties contemplated by the Terms and Conditions shall be in writing. Any such notice or request shall be deemed to have been duly given or made once it has been delivered by hand, mail, facsimile or, if so designated by the parties, by other electronic means, to the World Bank or the UNFCCC secretariat, in the case of the CMP, to which it is required or permitted to be given or made at such party’s address designated by notice to the World Bank or in the case of the CMP, the UNFCCC secretariat, giving such notice or making such a request. Deliveries made by facsimile or other electronic means shall also be confirmed by mail.
	E.	Amendment and termination
	33.	Any amendment to the Terms and Conditions shall become effective only upon approval and acceptance by the CMP and the World Bank.
	34.	The Trustee’s role as trustee servicing the Adaptation Fund under the Terms and Conditions shall be automatically terminated on 30 May 2017, unless the CMP and the Trustee affirmatively agree in writing to extend beyond this date the term of the Trustee’s services under the Terms and Conditions.
	35.	Notwithstanding paragraph 34 above, the CMP may at any time terminate the appointment of the Trustee as trustee servicing the Adaptation Fund under the Terms and Conditions. The Trustee’s role as trustee servicing the Adaptation Fund shall be terminated three months after receipt by the Trustee of the notice in writing of the termination of the appointment.
	36.	Notwithstanding paragraph 34 above, the Trustee may at any time terminate its role as trustee servicing the Adaptation Fund by giving the CMP notice in writing no less than three months prior to any session of the CMP. The Trustee’s role as trustee servicing the Adaptation Fund shall be terminated immediately after the session of the CMP which immediately follows the notice by the Trustee. In the event that no session of the CMP is held within 12 months of the Trustee giving notice, however, the Trustee’s role shall be terminated 12 months after the Trustee has given notice.
	37.	Following termination of the Trustee’s role as trustee servicing the Adaptation Fund pursuant to paragraphs 34, 35 or 36 above, the Trustee shall carry on no business for the Adaptation Fund except for the purpose of winding up its affairs. The Trustee shall take all necessary action for winding up its affairs in an expeditious manner, and for meeting the commitments already made by the Trustee and the transfer of any remaining funds, assets and receipts in the Trust Fund, as directed by the Adaptation Fund Board. The CMP hereby mandates that in such circumstances the Adaptation Fund Board shall provide such direction to the Trustee without undue delay. All of the powers and rights of the Trustee under the Terms and Conditions, including the right to be reimbursed for the fees, costs and expenses incurred under paragraph 15 above, shall continue until the affairs of the Trustee shall have been wound up.
	F.	Effectiveness
	38.	The Terms and Conditions or any amendments to the same shall become effective and constitute an agreement between the CMP and the World Bank upon decisions by the CMP and the World Bank to approve and accept the Terms and Conditions or any amendments to the same.
	
	10th plenary meeting
	12 December 2014
	
		
	Decision 2/CMP.10
	Second review of the Adaptation Fund
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
		Underlining the crucial importance of the Adaptation Fund as an essential channel for supporting adaptation action and the main promoter of direct access, together with its focus on funding the full costs of concrete adaptation projects and programmes in developing countries,
		Noting with deep concern the continued issues related to the sustainability, adequacy and predictability of funding from the Adaptation Fund, given the current prices of certified emission reductions, which affect its ability to fulfil its mandate,
		1.	Takes note of the report of the Adaptation Fund Board and the technical paper on the second review of the Adaptation Fund;
		2.	Underlines the urgent implementation of the resource mobilization strategy of the Adaptation Fund Board;
		3.	Encourages the Adaptation Fund Board to consider the following options for addressing the predictability of resources, in particular:
			(a)	The scale of resources;
			(b)	Regular estimates of the resources needed;
			(c)	Continuous review of the status of projects;
		4.	Requests the Adaptation Fund Board to consider options, including those contained in the technical paper referred to in paragraph 1 above, for addressing the diversification of revenue streams of the Adaptation Fund, in accordance with the mandate of the Fund;
		5.	Also requests the Adaptation Fund Board to consider, under its readiness programme, the following options for enhancing the access modalities of the Adaptation Fund:
			(a)	Targeted institutional strengthening strategies to assist developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, to accredit more national or regional implementing entities to the Adaptation Fund;
			(b)	Ensuring that accredited national implementing entities have increased and facilitated access to the Adaptation Fund, including for small-sized projects and programmes;
		6.	Further requests the Adaptation Fund Board to consider options for developing operational linkages, as appropriate, between the Adaptation Fund and constituted bodies under the Convention, taking into consideration the mandates of the respective bodies;
		7.	Takes note of decision 6/CP.20 concerning the request of the Conference of the Parties to the Standing Committee on Finance to consider issues related to possible future institutional linkages and relations between the Adaptation Fund and other institutions under the Convention;
		8.	Decides to extend to June 2017 the interim arrangements with the secretariat of the Adaptation Fund Board and the trustee of the Adaptation Fund, with a view to further consideration by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol of options for permanent institutional arrangements for the secretariat and trustee, including via an open and competitive bidding process and on the basis of the cost and time frame of each option and its legal and financial implications;
		9.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, at its forty-fourth session (May 2016), to initiate the third review of the Adaptation Fund, in accordance with the terms of reference contained in the annex to decision 2/CMP.9, or as they may be subsequently amended, and to report back to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its twelfth session (November–December 2016), with a view to the review being undertaken by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its thirteenth session (November–December 2017);
		10.	Also requests the Adaptation Fund Board to include in its report to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its eleventh session (November–December 2015) information on the progress made in relation to the matters referred to in paragraphs 3–6 above.
		10th plenary meeting
		12 December 2014
		
		
	Decision 3/CMP.10
		Date of the completion of the expert review process under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol for the first commitment period
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
		Recalling decision 27/CMP.1, annex, section XIII,
		Also recalling decisions 13/CMP.1, 14/CMP.1 and 22/CMP.1,
		Emphasizing the importance of the expert review process under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol for the last year of the commitment period, in view of the central role of this process in the assessment of Party compliance with commitments under Article 3, paragraph 1, of the Kyoto Protocol,
		Concerned that a significant proportion of annual inventory review reports have not been finalized by 15 April of the year following the submission of annual reports in recent annual review cycles, despite measures identified to facilitate their timely completion,
		Recognizing that the 2014 review process may encounter further difficulty due to the complexity of the process, as it is the last review for the first commitment period and that delays may result from factors that are not within the control of the Party subject to review,
		Recalling that the secretariat maintains a compilation and accounting database to compile and account for emissions and assigned amounts, pursuant to Article 3, paragraphs 7 and 8, of the Protocol and of additions to, and subtractions from, assigned amounts, pursuant to the same paragraphs, for the accounting of the compliance assessment, in order to facilitate the assessment of the compliance of each Party included in Annex I with its commitment under Article 3, paragraph 1, of the Protocol,
		Noting the importance of transparent information on the status of the 2014 compliance review in advance of the eleventh session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, to be held from 30 November to 11 December 2015,
		1.	Decides that the expert review process under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol for the last year of the first commitment period shall be completed by 10 August 2015 and decides that if the expert review process is not completed by this date, it shall continue, and the date of completion shall be the date of publication of the last inventory review report for the last year of the first commitment period;
		2.	Urges the secretariat to expedite the review process to satisfy this deadline;
		3.	Decides that the report upon expiration of the additional period for fulfilling commitments for the first commitment period, covering the information required in decision 13/CMP.1, annex, paragraph 49, using the standard electronic format tables as agreed in decision 14/CMP.1, shall be submitted as soon as practicable but not later than 45 days after the expiration of the additional period for fulfilling commitments for the first commitment period (hereinafter referred to as the true-up period);
		4.	Also decides that the secretariat shall produce, in electronic format, on 30 September 2015 and every four weeks thereafter, until the month of the completion of the true-up period, the following information for each Party with a commitment in Annex B for the first commitment period, indicating clearly the source of this information:
		(a)	Inventory data for each year of the commitment period;
		(b)	Total emissions over the commitment period;
		(c)	Total quantity of units held in Party holding accounts, cancellation accounts, and the retirement account;
		5.	Further decides that this information should include the total quantity of aggregated holdings in the clean development mechanism registry;
		6.	Decides that information on the review processes remaining to be completed should be provided by the secretariat together with the information referred to in paragraph 4 above, including information on which reviews are incomplete, which stage the incomplete review processes have reached, on what dates previous stages were completed and, to the extent possible, when outstanding stages are expected to be completed.
		10th plenary meeting
		12 December 2014
		
		
	Decision 4/CMP.10
	Guidance relating to the clean development mechanism
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
		Recalling the provisions of the Kyoto Protocol and decision 1/CMP.8,
		Cognizant of decision 3/CMP.1 and subsequent guidance provided by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol relating to the clean development mechanism,
	III.	General
	1.	Welcomes the annual report for 2013–2014 of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism;
	2.	Commends the Executive Board for the substantial work undertaken over the past year;
	3.	Expresses satisfaction with the progress of the clean development mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol, which to date has been responsible for:
		(a)	Over 7,500 project activities being registered in over 95 countries;
		(b)	Over 1,700 component project activities being included in over 270 programmes of activities registered in over 75 countries;
		(c)	Over 1.5 billion certified emission reductions being issued and over USD 215 billion being invested;
			(d)	Over 1.6 million certified emission reductions being voluntarily cancelled;
		(e)	Over 30 million certified emission reductions being transferred through the share of proceeds to the Adaptation Fund;
		(f)	Over USD 190 million of revenue being accrued for the Adaptation Fund from the sale of certified emission reductions;
		(g)	56 loans under the clean development mechanism loan scheme being approved and over USD 5 million of total commitment;
		(h)	16 sustainable development co-benefits description reports being published using the voluntary sustainable development tool;
	4.	Designates as operational entities those entities that have been accredited, and provisionally designated, as operational entities by the Executive Board to carry out the sector-specific validation and verification functions described in annex I;
	IV.	Baseline and monitoring methodologies and additionality
	5.	Requests the Executive Board to further consider the implications of allowing requests for revision of a baseline and monitoring methodology without a draft project design document in cases where the Executive Board considers that the assessment of such a request can be conducted without project-specific information, in order to provide flexibility in the provisions contained in decision 3/CMP.1, annex, paragraph 38, and report back to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its eleventh session for its consideration;
	6.	Encourages the Executive Board to continue its work on the simplification and streamlining of baseline and monitoring methodologies with the aim of reducing transaction costs for all project activities and programmes of activities, taking into account that countries, regions and subregions underrepresented in the clean development mechanism are especially affected by high transaction costs;
	7.	Decides to replace decision 5/CMP.1, annex, paragraph 32, related to the flexibility in the timing of verification for afforestation and reforestation project activities, with the paragraph contained in annex II;
	8.	Requests the Executive Board to explore additional cost-effective approaches to demonstrating the eligibility of land to qualify as a clean development mechanism afforestation or reforestation project activity, and report back on this matter to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its eleventh session for its consideration;
	V.	Registration of clean development mechanism project activities and issuance of certified emission reductions
	9.	Decides to allow the validation by a designated operational entity and the submission for approval by the Executive Board of a monitoring plan at any time up to the first request for issuance of certified emission reductions for all scales of project activities and programmes of activities in order to provide flexibility in the provisions contained in sections G. and H. of the annex to decision 3/CMP.1;
	10.	Endorses the development of a procedure by the Executive Board that would allow for the voluntary deregistration of clean development mechanism project activities by project participants, while ensuring environmental integrity and the consultation of Parties involved;
	11.	Requests the Executive Board to report on the implementation of the procedure for voluntary deregistration to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its eleventh session;
	12.	Also requests the Executive Board to publish its procedures for dealing with communications from stakeholders;
	13.	Further requests the Executive Board to further analyse options to allow the simplified registration of project activities and programmes of activities that qualify as automatically additional and report back to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its eleventh session for its consideration; the options would include, inter alia, that registration is approved on the basis of a standardized pre-approved registration template using objective criteria without prior validation through a designated operational entity, combined with ex post confirmation by a designated operational entity during the first verification of the compliance with the registered template of the implemented project activity or programme of activities;
	14.	Requests the Executive Board to analyse the implications, and possible provisions for ensuring environmental integrity, of allowing the same designated operational entity to carry out validation and verification for the same project activity or programme of activities of all scales and report back on this matter to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its eleventh session for its consideration;
	15.	Also requests the Executive Board to develop and digitize methodology-specific design document forms for project activities and programmes of activities;
	16.	Decides that, for multi-country programmes of activities, a request for review of a request for issuance raised by a host Party of a programme of activities shall affect only the component project activities in the territory of that Party;
	17.	Requests the Executive Board to streamline provisions relating to programmes of activities in the “CDM project standard”, “CDM validation and verification standard”, “CDM project cycle procedure” and other relevant documents, with a view to achieving consistency in a consolidated set of rules;
	18.	Also requests the Executive Board to consider adjusting, and if appropriate implement, the rules governing programmes of activities to reflect the special features of programmes of activities in order to facilitate effective implementation and reduce associated transaction costs while ensuring environmental integrity, taking into account the implications for liability with regard to the issuance of certified emission reductions resulting from significant deficiencies in validation, verification and certification reports, including rules that:
		(a)	Apply microscale thresholds at the unit level rather than at the component project activity level;
		(b)	Allow, as an option, a simplified validation and registration process for activities that satisfy microscale thresholds and are considered automatically additional; this option shall allow for:
			(i)	Validation of a programme of activities without the submission of a specific-case component project activity;
			(ii)	Inclusion on the basis of a pre-approved standardized inclusion template of component project activities carried out directly by the coordinating/managing entity without prior validation through a designated operational entity;
			VI.	Regional and subregional distribution
			19.	Requests the Executive Board to explore and analyse options to improve accreditation of operational entities in regions underrepresented in the clean development mechanism, and report back on this matter to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its eleventh session for its consideration;
			VII.	Resources for work on the clean development mechanism
			20.	Requests the Executive Board to ensure the prudent management of the resources of the clean development mechanism and its ability to perform its duties in maintaining and developing the mechanism up to the end of the true-up period of the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol.
			
	Annex I
		Entities accredited and provisionally designated by the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism in the reporting period, including entities for which the scope of accreditation was extended (5 October 2013 to 30 September 2014)
			| Name of entity | Sectoral scopes (validation and verification) |
			| BRTÜV Avaliações da Qualidade S.A. (BRTÜV)a | 1–5, 12–14 |
			| Bureau Veritas Certification Holding SAS (BVCH)b | 1–15 |
			| Carbon Check (Pty) Ltd. (Carbon Check)d | 1–5, 8–10, 13 |
			| Carbon Check (Pty) Ltd. (Carbon Check)c | 14 |
			| CEPREI Certification Body (CEPREI)d | 1–5, 8–10, 13, 15 |
			| China Classification Society Certification Company (CCSC)b | 1–10, 13 |
			| China Environmental United Certification Center Co. Ltd. (CEC)b | 1–15 |
			| China Quality Certification Center (CQC)b | 1–15 |
			| Colombian Institute for Technical Standards and Certification (ICONTEC)d | 1–5, 7, 10, 13–15 |
			| Conestoga-Rovers & Associates Ltd. (CRA)b | 1, 4, 5, 8–10, 12, 13 |
			| Deloitte Tohmatsu Evaluation and Certification Organization Co. Ltd. (Deloitte–TECO)d | 1–5, 8, 10, 12, 13, 15 |
			| Deloitte Tohmatsu Evaluation and Certification Organization Co. Ltd. (Deloitte–TECO)e | 6 |
			| DNV Climate Change Services AS (DNV)b | 1–15 |
			| Earthood Services Private Limiteda | 1, 3–5, 8, 10, 12, 13, 15 |
			| EPIC Sustainability Services Pvt. Ltd. (EPIC)b | 1–11, 13–15 |
			| ERM Certification and Verification Services Limited (ERM CVS)b | 1–5, 8–10, 13, 15 |
			| Ernst & Young Associés (France) (EYG)b | 14 |
			| Foundation for Industrial Development – Management System Certification Institute (Thailand) (MASCI)b | 1, 3, 4, 9, 10, 13, 15 |
			| Germanischer Lloyd Certification GmbH (GLC)b | 1–5, 7–10, 13, 15 |
			| Hong Kong Quality Assurance Agency (HKQAA)b | 1 |
			| IBOPE Instituto Brasileiro de Opinião Pública e Estatística Ltda. (IBOPE)b | 1 |
			| Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE)b | 14 |
			| JACO CDM Ltd. (JACO CDM)d | 1, 3, 13, 14 |
			| Japan Consulting Institute (JCI)f | 1, 2, 4, 5, 8–10, 13 |
			| Japan Management Association (JMA)b | 1–4, 6, 8, 9, 14 |
			| Japan Quality Assurance Organization (JQA)b | 1, 3–5, 9, 10, 13, 14 |
			| Japan Quality Assurance Organization (JQA)e | 11 |
			| KBS Certification Services Pvt. Ltd. (KBS)b | 1, 3–5, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15 |
			| Korea Energy Management Corporation (KEMCO)b | 1, 3–5, 7, 9, 11–15 |
			| Korea Energy Management Corporation (KEMCO)e | 2, 6, 8, 10 |
			| Korea Environment Corporation (KECO)b | 1, 3, 13 |
			| Korea Environment Corporation (KECO)e | 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 14, 15 |
			| Korea Testing & Research Institute (KTR)b | 1, 4–5, 9–11, 13 |
			| Korean Foundation for Quality (KFQ)b | 1–5, 8–11, 13 |
			| Korean Register of Shipping (KR)b | 1, 7, 13 |
			| Korean Standards Association (KSA)b | 1–5, 9, 10, 13 |
			| LGAI Technological Center S.A. (LGAI)b | 1, 13 |
			| Lloyd’s Register Quality Assurance Ltd. (LRQA)b | 1–13 |
			| Northeast Audit Co. Ltd. (NAC)b | 1–13, 15 |
			| Perry Johnson Registrars Carbon Emissions Services (PJRCES)d | 1–4, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15 |
			| Re-consult Ltd. (Re-consult)b | 1 |
			| RINA Services S.p.A. (RINA)b | 1–11 ,13–15 |
			| SGS United Kingdom Ltd. (SGS)b | 1–7, 9–13, 15 |
			| Shenzhen CTI International Certification Co. Ltd. (CTI)b | 1–4, 6–10, 13 |
			| SIRIM QAS International Sdn. Bhd. (SIRIM)b | 1–4, 7–10, 13, 15 |
			| Spanish Association for Standardisation and Certification (AENOR)d | 1–15 |
			| Swiss Association for Quality and Management Systems (SQS)f | 1–15 |
			| TÜV NORD CERT GmbH (TÜV NORD)b | 1–16 |
			| TÜV Rheinland (China) Ltd. (TÜV Rheinland)b | 1–15 |
			| TÜV SÜD South Asia Private Ltd. (TÜV SÜD)b | 1–15 |
			| URS Verification Private Limited (URS)b | 1, 13 |
			
				a   Accreditation granted for five years as per decision 5/CMP.8, paragraph 20.
				b   Accreditation period extended from three to five years as per decision 5/CMP.8, paragraph 20.
				c   Extension of sectoral scopes. Only the new sectoral scopes are indicated.
				d   Reaccreditation granted for five years as per decision 5/CMP.8, paragraph 20.
				e   Voluntary withdrawal of accreditation. Only the withdrawn sectoral scopes are indicated.
				f   Voluntary withdrawal of accreditation in its entirety.
	Annex II
		Flexibility in the timing of the verification of afforestation and reforestation project activities
			Replacement of decision 5/CMP.1, annex, paragraph 32:
			“The initial verification and certification of an afforestation or reforestation project activity under the clean development mechanism may be undertaken at a time selected by the project participants. In the case of afforestation or reforestation project activities for which tCERs are issued, subsequent verification and certification may be carried out at most once in each subsequent commitment period, at a time selected by the project participants. For afforestation or reforestation project activities for which lCERs are issued, subsequent verifications and certifications shall be carried out within eight years of the date when the previous certification report was submitted until the end of the crediting period.”
			
			10th plenary meeting
			12 December 2014
				
			
	Decision 5/CMP.10
		Guidance on the implementation of Article 6 of the 
Kyoto Protocol
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
			Recalling the provisions of Articles 3 and 6 of the Kyoto Protocol and decision 1/CMP.8,
			Cognizant of decision 9/CMP.1 and subsequent guidance provided by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol relating to joint implementation,
			1.	Takes note of the achievements of joint implementation in the period 2006–2014, accounting for 548 Track 1 projects, 51 Track 2 projects, five accredited independent entities and over 856 million emission reduction units issued for emission reductions generated for the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol;
			2.	Takes note with appreciation of the annual report for 2013–2014 of the Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee and the status of work undertaken by the Committee, in particular:
			(a)	The additional recommendations on the transition from the existing to the revised joint implementation guidelines, as a further complement to the recommendations submitted by the Committee to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol in 2012 and 2013;
			(b)	The recommendations and the report on progress made in relation to the accreditation system for joint implementation aligned with that of the clean development mechanism;
			3.	Reiterates its concern regarding the difficult market situation currently faced by participants in joint implementation and the need to ensure the continued success of the mechanism in order to assist Parties with a quantified emission limitation or reduction commitment inscribed in the third column of Annex B in the Doha Amendment, contained in annex I to decision 1/CMP.8 in meeting their commitments for the second commitment period under Article 3 of the Kyoto Protocol;
			4.	Takes note of the ongoing work of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on the review of the joint implementation guidelines, as contained in the annex to decision 9/CMP.1;
			5.	Requests the secretariat to prepare a technical paper, for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its forty-second session (June 2015), on the opportunities for cost savings and efficiencies for joint implementation, learning from the experiences of the clean development mechanism, while recognizing the respective mandates of the two mechanisms;
			6.	Invites Parties to submit to the secretariat, by 16 March 2015, examples of voluntary technical approaches, designed by host Parties for their joint implementation projects, that could assist the host Parties in achieving their quantified emission limitation or reduction commitments under the Kyoto Protocol;
			7.	Requests the secretariat to synthesize these submissions into a synthesis report for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its forty-second session;
			8.	Also requests the Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee to submit elaborated recommendations, for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its forty-second session, on the review of the joint implementation guidelines;
			9.	Further requests the Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee to ensure sufficient infrastructure and capacity for the mechanism’s use by Parties until at least the end of the additional period for fulfilling commitments under the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol, and to keep the joint implementation management plan under review, making necessary adjustments to ensure the efficient, cost-effective and transparent functioning of joint implementation.
			10th plenary meeting
			12 December 2014
				
			
		Decision 6/CMP.10
		Synergy relating to accreditation under the mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
			Recalling decision 6/CMP.8, paragraph 15(b),
			1.	Requests the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism and the Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee to collaborate in considering the establishment of a joint accreditation committee under their authority and supervision and in the operation of accreditation, within the mandates established by decisions 3/CMP.1 and 9/CMP.1 and other relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol related to accreditation;
			2.	Also requests the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism and the Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee to report on the progress of the actions referred to in paragraph 1 above to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its eleventh session (November–December 2015).
			
			10th plenary meeting
			12 December 2014
			
		Decision 7/CMP.10
		Outcome of the work programme on modalities and procedures for possible additional land use, land-use change and forestry activities under the clean development mechanism
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
			Affirming that the implementation of land use, land-use change and forestry activities included under the provisions of the Kyoto Protocol shall be consistent with the objectives and principles of, and any decisions taken under, the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol,
			Recalling decisions 5/CMP.1, 6/CMP.1 and 16/CMP.1,
			Having considered decision 2/CMP.7,
				1.	Requests the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism, in the context of the work programme referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraph 6, to assess the applicability of the modalities and procedures contained in decisions 5/CMP.1 and 6/CMP.1 to project activities involving revegetation, based on the definition contained in decision 16/CMP.1, annex, paragraph 1(e), including in areas with agroforestry and silvopastoral practices where the established vegetation is not likely to reach the forest thresholds selected by the host Party under decision 5/CMP.1, annex, paragraph 8, in the event that such project activities would be eligible under the clean development mechanism;
				2.	Also requests the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism to report to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, at its eleventh session (November–December 2015), on the outcome of the assessment referred to in paragraph 1 above, including an indication of sections of the modalities and procedures in which modifications would be needed in respect of the project activities referred to in paragraph 1 above;
				3.	Further requests the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice, in the context of the work referred to in paragraph 4 below, to consider the report of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism referred to in paragraph 2 above at its forty-third session (November–December 2015);
				4.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice to continue, under the work programme referred to in paragraph 1 above, its consideration of additional land use, land-use change and forestry activities under the clean development mechanism at its forty-fourth session (May 2016), with a view to recommending a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its twelfth session (November–December 2016).
			10th plenary meeting
			12 December 2014
			
			
		Decision 8/CMP.10
		Administrative, financial and institutional matters
			The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
			Recalling Article 13, paragraph 5, of the Kyoto Protocol,
			Also recalling decision 27/CP.19, in particular paragraph 11,
			Further recalling paragraph 11 of the financial procedures of the Conference of the Parties, which also applies to the Kyoto Protocol,
			Taking note of decision 22/CP.20,
			Having considered the information contained in the documents prepared by the secretariat on administrative, financial and institutional matters,
I.	Audited financial statements for the biennium 2012–2013
1.	Takes note of the audited financial statements for the biennium 2012–2013, the audit report of the United Nations Board of Auditors, which includes recommendations, and the comments of the secretariat thereon;
2.	Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations for arranging the audits of the accounts of the Convention and for the valuable observations and recommendations of the auditors;
3.	Urges the Executive Secretary to implement the recommendations of the auditors, as appropriate;
II.	Budget performance report for the biennium 2014–2015
4.	Takes note of the report on budget performance for the biennium 2014–2015 as at 30 June 2014 and the status of contributions as at 15 November 2014 to the trust funds administered by the secretariat;
5.	Expresses its appreciation to Parties that made contributions to the core budget and to the international transaction log in a timely manner;
6.	Calls upon Parties that have not yet made contributions to the core budget or to the international transaction log to do so without delay, bearing in mind that contributions are due on 1 January of each year in accordance with the financial procedures of the Conference of the Parties;
7.	Expresses its appreciation for the contributions received from Parties to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process and to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities;
8.	Urges Parties to further contribute to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process, in order to ensure the widest possible participation in the negotiations in 2015, and to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities;
9.	Reiterates its appreciation to the Government of Germany for its annual voluntary contribution to the core budget of EUR 766,938 and its special contribution of EUR 1,789,522 as Host Government of the secretariat;
III.	Programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017
10.	Requests the Executive Secretary to submit, for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its forty-second session (June 2015), a proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017;
11.	Also requests the Executive Secretary, when preparing the programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017, to prepare a contingency for funding conference services, should this prove necessary in the light of decisions taken by the General Assembly at its seventieth session;
12.	Further requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to recommend, at its forty-second session, a programme budget for adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its eleventh session (November–December 2015);
13.	Authorizes the Executive Secretary to notify Parties of their indicative contributions for 2016 on the basis of the recommended budget.

10th plenary meeting
12 December 2014

Resolution 1/CMP.10
	
Expression of gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Peru and the people of the city of Lima
	Draft resolution submitted by France
		The Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
		Having met in Lima from 1 to 12 December 2014 at the invitation of the Government of the Republic of Peru,
			
				1.	Express their profound gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Peru for having made it possible for the twentieth session of the Conference of the Parties and the tenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol to be held in Lima;
				2.	Request the Government of the Republic of Peru to convey to the city and people of Lima the gratitude of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol for the hospitality and warmth extended to the participants.
			10th plenary meeting
			14 December 2014
		
