|  | United Nations | FCCC/KP/CMP/2018/8/Add.1 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 19 March 2019  Original: English |

Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting
of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol
Report of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol on its fourteenth session, held in Katowice from 2 to 15 December 2018
	Addendum
	Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its fourteenth session
Contents
Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol
	Decision		Page
	1/CMP.14	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund			2
	2/CMP.14	Report of the Adaptation Fund Board			3
		3/CMP.14	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Kyoto 
Protocol of the forum on the impact of the implementation of 
response measures			5
			4/CMP.14	Guidance relating to the clean development mechanism			6
			5/CMP.14	Administrative, financial and institutional matters			8
			
			Resolution
			1/CMP.14	Expression of gratitude to the Government of the Republic of 
Poland and the people of the city of Katowice			10
	
Decision 1/CMP.14
	Matters relating to the Adaptation Fund
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
	1.	Takes note of decision 13/CMA.1, whereby the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement decided that the Adaptation Fund shall serve the Paris Agreement under the guidance of, and be accountable to, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement with respect to all matters relating to the Paris Agreement, effective 1 January 2019;
	2.	Decides that the Adaptation Fund shall exclusively serve the Paris Agreement and shall no longer serve the Kyoto Protocol once the share of proceeds under Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement becomes available;
	3.	Also decides, pursuant to paragraph 2 above, that the Adaptation Fund shall continue to receive the share of proceeds, if available, from activities under Articles 6, 12 and 17 of the Kyoto Protocol;
	4.	Further decides to ensure that developing country Parties and developed country Parties that are Parties to the Paris Agreement are eligible for membership on the Adaptation Fund Board;
	5.	Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, at its fiftieth session (June 2019), to consider the matter referred to in paragraph 4 above, and to forward a recommendation to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol for consideration at its fifteenth session (December 2019);
	6.	Also requests the Adaptation Fund Board to consider the rules of procedure of the Board, the arrangements of the Adaptation Fund with respect to the Paris Agreement and any other matter so as to ensure the Adaptation Fund serves the Paris Agreement smoothly; to consider the implications of the Adaptation Fund receiving the share of proceeds from activities under Articles 6, 12 and 17 of the Kyoto Protocol when the Adaptation Fund serves the Paris Agreement; and to make recommendations to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its fifteenth session with a view to the recommendations being forwarded to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement for consideration at its second session (December 2019).
	8th plenary meeting
15 December 2018
	
Decision 2/CMP.14
Report of the Adaptation Fund Board
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
	Recalling decisions 1/CMP.3, 1/CMP.4, 2/CMP.10, 1/CMP.11 and 1/CMP.13,
		1.	Takes note of the annual report of the Adaptation Fund Board, including its addendum, and the information contained therein;
		2.	Notes the following information, actions and decisions relating to the Adaptation Fund Board presented in the report referred to in paragraph 1 above:
			(a)	The accreditation of 28 national implementing entities for accessing resources from the Adaptation Fund directly;
			(b)	Cumulative project and programme approvals reaching USD 476.8 million as at 30 June 2018;
			(c)	Funds available for new funding approvals amounting to USD 225.7 million as at 30 June 2018;
			(d)	The value of projects and programmes in the active pipeline estimated at over USD 270 million as at 30 June 2018;
			(e)	The approval, under the pilot phase of the readiness support package, of the first readiness support package grant (in July 2018), amounting to USD 100,000, to provide tailored technical assistance and capacity-building through a suite of tools for supporting developing country entities in accessing the Fund’s resources through direct access;
			(f)	The approval of funding decisions for readiness grants amounting to USD 175,000, consisting of USD 150,000 in South–South cooperation grants and a USD 25,000 technical assistance grant for the environmental and social safeguards policy and the gender policy;
			(g)	The cumulative receipts of USD 753.5 million into the Adaptation Trust Fund, as at 30 June 2018, comprising USD 199.4 million from the monetization of certified emission reductions, USD 538.3 million from additional contributions and USD 15.8 million from investment income earned on the trust fund balance;
			(h)	The adoption, by the Board, of the first medium-term strategy for the Fund for the period 2018–2022 (in October 2017) and of an implementation plan for the strategy (in March 2018);
			(i)	The approval of eight single-country project/programme proposals submitted by implementing entities, totalling USD 39.0 million, including four proposals submitted by national implementing entities amounting to USD 10.3 million, one proposal submitted by a regional implementing entity to the amount of USD 10.0 million, and three proposals submitted by multilateral implementing entities to the amount of USD 18.6 million;
			(j)	The approval of two regional (multi-country) projects, with total funding of USD 19 million, and the decision to provide funding up to the amount of USD 60 million for regional project and programme proposals in fiscal year 2019 (1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019);
			(k)	The contributions received from 1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018, amounting to USD 95.9 million, from Germany, Ireland, Italy and Sweden, and the Brussels-Capital and Walloon Regions of Belgium;
		3.	Also notes the total amount of USD 95.9 million in contributions made to the Adaptation Fund in 2017, surpassing the fundraising target of the Adaptation Fund Board of USD 80 million for the 2017 calendar year;
		4.	Welcomes the financial pledges to the Adaptation Fund made by the European Union, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, New Zealand and Sweden, and the Brussels-Capital and Walloon Regions of Belgium, equivalent to USD 129.0 million;
		5.	Notes that, with the pledges referred to in paragraph 4 above, the fundraising target of the Adaptation Fund Board of USD 90 million for the 2018 calendar year has been surpassed;
		6.	Reiterates its concern regarding the issues related to the sustainability, adequacy and predictability of funding for the Adaptation Fund due to the current uncertainty about the prices of certified emission reductions;
		7.	Also reiterates the encouragement of the scaling up of financial resources, including the provision of voluntary support, that are additional to the share of proceeds levied on certified emission reductions, in order to support the resource mobilization efforts of the Adaptation Fund Board with a view to strengthening the Adaptation Fund;
		8.	Welcomes with appreciation the Adaptation Fund Board’s consideration of and report on linkages to other funds to ensure coherence and complementarity;
		9.	Encourages the Adaptation Fund Board to continue, in line with its existing mandate, its consideration of linkages between the Adaptation Fund and other funds;
		10.	Also encourages the Adaptation Fund Board to continue its efforts to enhance complementarity and coherence with other funds both under and outside the Convention, including to better align processes and leverage financing;
		11.	Requests the Adaptation Fund Board to report on any outcomes related to paragraphs 9 and 10 above to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its fifteenth session (December 2019).
	8th plenary meeting
15 December 2018
	
Decision 3/CMP.14
Modalities, work programme and functions under the Kyoto Protocol of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures
	The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
	Recalling Article 4 of the Convention,
	Also recalling Article 2 and Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol,
	Reaffirming Article 4, paragraph 15, of the Paris Agreement,
	Recalling decisions 1/CP.16, 2/CP.17, 8/CP.17, 1/CP.21, 11/CP.21 and 5/CMP.7, paragraph 4,
	Recognizing that Parties may be affected not only by climate change but also by the impacts of the measures taken in response to it,
	Acknowledging that there are both positive and negative impacts associated with measures taken in response to climate change,
	Also acknowledging that response measures should be understood in the broader context of the transition towards low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient development,
	Reaffirming that Parties should cooperate to promote a supportive and inclusive international economic system that will lead to sustainable economic growth and development in all Parties,
	1.	Acknowledges that the existing forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serves the Kyoto Protocol in relation to matters under the Kyoto Protocol;
	2.	Adopts the modalities, work programme and functions of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures contained in the annex to decision 7/CMA.1 for the work of the forum under the Kyoto Protocol;
	3.	Acknowledges that there is one single forum that covers the work of the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement on all matters relating to the impact of the implementation of response measures;
	4.	Affirms that the forum shall continue to report to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol in respect of matters falling under Article 2, paragraph 3, and Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol, where the forum requires the guidance of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol.
	6th plenary meeting
	13 December 2018
		
Decision 4/CMP.14
	Guidance relating to the clean development mechanism
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
		Recalling the provisions of Articles 3 and 12 of the Kyoto Protocol,
		Also recalling decision 3/CMP.1 and subsequent guidance provided by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol relating to the clean development mechanism,
		Acknowledging the contribution to global efforts to address climate change by the clean development mechanism, which as at 2 December 2018 had been responsible for over 7,806 project activities being registered, 316 programmes of activities being registered and over 1.97 billion certified emission reductions being issued, of which over 154 million had been voluntarily cancelled either in national registries or in the clean development mechanism registry,
		Noting decision 1/CP.19, paragraph 5(c), and decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 106, on the role of voluntary cancellation of certified emission reductions,
		I.	General
			1.	Welcomes the report for 2017–2018 of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism;
			2.	Appreciates the work undertaken over the past year by the Executive Board, its panels and the secretariat to oversee the implementation of the mechanism and to maintain stakeholder engagement in its operations;
			3.	Designates as operational entities those entities that have been accredited and provisionally designated as such by the Executive Board to carry out the sector-specific validation functions and/or sector-specific verification functions described in the annex;
		II.	Operation and oversight of the clean development mechanism
			4.	Encourages the Executive Board to review methodological approaches for calculating emission reductions from project activities, resulting in the reduced use of non-renewable biomass in households;
			5.	Requests the Executive Board and the secretariat to ensure the efficient and prudent use of resources of the Trust Fund for the Clean Development Mechanism to the end of the true-up period for the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol, and to present a comprehensive report to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its fifteenth session (December 2019) on the present financial situation of the clean development mechanism and the foreseen budgets for activities until the end of 2023.
	Annex
	Designation of operational entities by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its fourteenth session
		[English only]
		
		| Name of entity | Sectoral scopes (validation and verification) |
		| Bureau Veritas India Pvt. Ltd. (BVI)a | 1–5, 7–10 and 12–15 |
		| CEPREI certification body (CEPREI)a | 1–5, 8–10, 13 and 15 |
		| EPIC Sustainability Services Pvt. Ltd. (EPIC)a | 1–16 |
		| GHD Limited (GHD)a | 1, 4, 5, 8–10, 12 and 13 |
		| LGAI Technological Center, S.A. (LGAI Tech. Center S.A)a | 1, 3 and 13 |
		| Lloyd’s Register Quality Assurance Ltd. (LRQA)a | 1–3, 7 and 13 |
		| Perry Johnson Registrars Carbon Emissions Services (PJRCES)b | 4, 7, 10, 12 and 15 |
		| Perry Johnson Registrars Carbon Emissions Services (PJRCES)c | 1–3, 9 and 13 |
		| Perry Johnson Registrars Carbon Emissions Services (PJRCES)d | 1–3, 9 and 13 |
		| Shenzhen CTI International Certification Co., Ltd (CTI)a | 1–15 |
		| TÜV NORD CERT GmbH (TÜV NORD)a | 1–16 |
		| TÜV SÜD South Asia Private Limited (TÜV SÜD)a | 1, 3–5, 7, 10, 11 and 13–15 |
		
			a   Accreditation granted for five years.
			b   Withdrawal of accreditation by the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism; only the withdrawn sectoral scopes are indicated.
			c   Entity provisionally suspended; only the suspended sectoral scopes are indicated.
			d   Withdrawal of accreditation in its entirety by the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism; the withdrawn sectoral scopes are indicated.
		6th plenary meeting
		13 December 2018
	Decision 5/CMP.14
	Administrative, financial and institutional matters
		The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,
		Recalling Article 13, paragraph 5, of the Kyoto Protocol,
		Also recalling the financial procedures for the Conference of the Parties, which also apply to the Kyoto Protocol,
			Taking note of decision 18/CP.24,
		Having considered the information contained in the documents prepared by the secretariat on administrative, financial and institutional matters,
		Noting that notifications to Parties of their contributions for 2019 were sent to them on 30 September 2018,
		I.	Budget performance for the biennium 2018–2019
			1.	Takes note of the information contained in the report on budget performance for the biennium 2018–2019 as at 30 June 2018 and the note on the status of contributions to the trust funds administered by the secretariat as at 16 November 2018;
				2.	Expresses its appreciation to Parties that made contributions to the core budget in a timely manner;
				3.	Expresses concern regarding the high level of outstanding contributions to the core budget for the current and previous bienniums, which has resulted in difficulties with cash flow and the effective implementation of activities;
				4.	Strongly urges Parties that have not made contributions in full to the core budget for the current and/or previous bienniums to do so without further delay;
			5.	Calls upon Parties to make their contributions to the core budget for 2019 in a timely manner, bearing in mind that contributions are due on 1 January of each year in accordance with the financial procedures for the Conference of the Parties;
				6.	Expresses its appreciation for the contributions to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process and to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities received from Parties, including those contributions that allow for greater flexibility in allocation;
			7.	Urges Parties to further contribute to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process in order to ensure the widest possible participation in the negotiations in 2019, and to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities;
				8.	Reiterates its appreciation to the Government of Germany for its annual voluntary contribution to the core budget of EUR 766,938 and its special contribution of EUR 1,789,522 as Host Government of the secretariat;
				9.	Requests the Executive Secretary to take further measures to recover outstanding contributions and encourages Parties to pay those outstanding contributions as soon as possible;
		II.	Audit report and financial statements for 2017
			10.	Takes note of the audit report of the United Nations Board of Auditors and the financial statements for 2017, which include recommendations, and the comments of the secretariat thereon;
			11.	Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations for arranging the audit of the accounts of the Convention;
			12.	Also expresses its appreciation to the auditors for the valuable observations and recommendations and the presentation made thereon to Parties;
			13.	Requests the Executive Secretary to implement the recommendations of the auditors, as appropriate, in particular those related to outstanding contributions and the policies on hiring consultants and individual contractors, and to update Parties on progress in the next audit report;
		III.	Other budgetary matters
			14.	Also requests the Executive Secretary to present the outcome of its review of the secretariat’s operations and structure, including on the synergy and prioritization of its activities, with a view to reducing redundancies and increasing cost-efficiency, in the context of the programme budget for 2020–2021;
			15.	Further requests the Executive Secretary to prepare, regularly update and publish before each session of the subsidiary bodies brief reports on standard costs and, if available, options for reducing the cost of activities where practicable;
			16.	Requests the Executive Secretary to provide budgetary cost implications in pre-session documents if they include suggestions for new mandates to the secretariat and if sufficient information is available on the details of the proposed activities;
			17.	Also requests the Executive Secretary to provide any other such information to Parties as may be required to ensure that the budgetary implications of decisions and conclusions, including those proposed in pre-session documents, can be taken into account in advance of decision-making.
			7th plenary meeting
			14 December 2018
			
	Resolution 1/CMP.14
	Expression of gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Poland and the people of the city of Katowice
		Resolution submitted by Fiji
			The Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement,
			Having met in Katowice from 2 to 14 December 2018,
			1.	Express their profound gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Poland for having made it possible for the twenty-fourth session of the Conference of the Parties, the fourteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the third part of the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to be held in Katowice;
			2.	Request the Government of the Republic of Poland to convey to the city and people of Katowice the gratitude of the Conference of the Parties, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement for the hospitality and warmth extended to the participants.
			9th plenary meeting
			15 December 2018
				
