|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBSTA/2023/8 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 15 March 2024  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its fifty-ninth session, held in the United Arab Emirates from 30 November to 6 December 2023
	Contents
		Page
		Abbreviations and acronyms		3
			I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)		4
		II.	Organizational matters 
		(Agenda item 2)		4
		A.	Adoption of the agenda 		4
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		5
		C.	Mandated events		6
			III.	Matters relating to adaptation
	(Agenda item 3)		6
		A.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in
			decision 7/CMA.3		6
			B.	Report of the Adaptation Committee and review of the progress, effectiveness and 
performance of the Adaptation Committee		7
		IV.	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impact	s 		(Agenda item 4)		7
			A.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and 
Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts		7
		B.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for
			Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts		8
		V.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement 
		(Agenda item 5)		8
		VI.	Research and systematic observation 
		(Agenda item 6)		8
			VII.	Sharm el-Sheikh mitigation ambition and implementation work programme referred to in 
decision 4/CMA.4
	(Agenda item 7)		10
			VIII.	Work programme on just transition pathways referred to in the relevant paragraphs of 
decision 1/CMA.4 
	(Agenda item 8)		10
			IX.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving 
the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement 
	(Agenda item 9)		11
		X.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security	
		(Agenda item 10)		11
			XI.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism:
	joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre 
and Network
	(Agenda item 11)		11
		XII.	Methodological issues under the Convention 
		(Agenda item 12)		12
		A.	Greenhouse gas data interface		12
		B.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport		12
		XIII.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement 
		(Agenda item 13)		12
		A.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the
			Paris Agreement and in decision 2/CMA.3 		12
			B.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, 
of the Paris Agreement and referred to in decision 3/CMA.3		13
		C.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6,
			paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 4/CMA.3 		13
		XIV.	Annual reports on technical reviews 
		(Agenda item 14)		15
		A.	Technical review of information reported under the Convention by Parties included in
			Annex I to the Convention in their biennial reports and national communications		15
			B.	Technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the 
Convention		16
			C.	Technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties 
included in Annex I		16
		XV.	Other matters 
		(Agenda item 15)		16
			XVI.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 16)		16
		
Abbreviations and acronyms
	| AILAC | Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean |
	| CMA | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement |
	| CMP | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol |
	| COP | Conference of the Parties |
	| EIG | Environmental Integrity Group |
	| EU | European Union |
	| GCNMA | Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches |
	| GHG | greenhouse gas |
	| LDC | least developed country |
	| LMDCs | Like-minded Developing Countries |
	| SB | sessions of the subsidiary bodies |
	| SBI | Subsidiary Body for Implementation |
	| SBSTA | Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice |
	| WMO | World Meteorological Organization |
	
	
	I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)
		1.	SBSTA 59 was held at Expo City Dubai in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, from 30 November to 6 December 2023.
		2.	The Chair of the SBSTA, Harry Vreuls (Kingdom of the Netherlands), opened the session and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Nathalie Flores González (Dominican Republic) as Vice-Chair and Zita Kassa Wilks (Gabon) as Rapporteur.
	II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
			3.	At its 1st meeting, on 30 November, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations and the supplementary provisional agenda. The Chair of the SBSTA recalled the understanding reached among Parties outlined by the COP President at the 1st plenary meeting of COP 28, which applies mutatis mutandis to the SBSTA, and proposed that the supplementary provisional agenda be amended to reflect this understanding, with items 15–18 deleted and the subsequent items renumbered accordingly.
			4.	The SBSTA adopted the agenda as follows:
				1.	Opening of the session.
				2.	Organizational matters:
					(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
					(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
					(c)	Mandated events.
				3.	Matters relating to adaptation:
					(a)	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3;*
					(b)	Report of the Adaptation Committee and review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee.*
				4.	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts:
					(a)	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts;*
					(b)	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.*
				5.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement.*
				6.	Research and systematic observation.
				7.	Sharm el-Sheikh mitigation ambition and implementation work programme referred to in decision 4/CMA.4.*
				8.	Work programme on just transition pathways referred to in the relevant paragraphs of decision 1/CMA.4.*
				9.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement.*
				10.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security.*
				11.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network.*
				12.	Methodological issues under the Convention:
					(a)	Greenhouse gas data interface;
					(b)	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport.
				13.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement:
					(a)	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 2/CMA.3;
					(b)	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement and referred to in decision 3/CMA.3;
					(c)	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 4/CMA.3.
				14.	Annual reports on technical reviews:
					(a)	Technical review of information reported under the Convention by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention in their biennial reports and national communications;
					(b)	Technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(c)	Technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I.
				15.	Other matters.
				16.	Closure of and report on the session.
		B.	Organization of the work of the session
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			5.	At the 1st meeting of the SBSTA, which was held jointly with the 1st meeting of SBI 59, the Chair recalled the proposal for the organization of work outlined in the note that he prepared jointly with the SBI Chair. In view of the heavy workload, he urged delegates to arrive at meetings on time in order to maximize negotiation time and ensure timely closure of the session.
			6.	The Chair drew attention to the deadline for all groups to conclude their work by 6 p.m. on 5 December to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions in all official United Nations languages for the closing plenary on 6 December. To accelerate work, he urged Parties to start drafting texts as early as possible and invited pairs of co-chairs and co-facilitators to assist in organizing the work. He encouraged Parties to keep all negotiation meetings, except those on matters requiring consideration specifically by Parties, open to observers.
			7.	On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to proceed on that basis and in line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
			8.	The documents that were before SBSTA 59 are available on the UNFCCC website.
			9.	At the 2nd meeting of the SBSTA, which was held jointly with the 2nd meetings of SBI 59, COP 28, CMP 18 and CMA 5, on 30 November, statements were made by representatives of 21 Parties, including 13 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; Coalition for Rainforest Nations; EIG; EU and its member States; Group of 77 and China; LDCs; LMDCs; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of the nine UNFCCC constituencies: business and industry, children and youth, environmental, farmers and agricultural, research and independent, and trade union non-governmental organizations; Indigenous Peoples organizations; local governmental and municipal authorities; and women and gender constituency.
			10.	At the same meeting, statements were made by representatives of seven intergovernmental organizations: Committee on Earth Observation Satellites on behalf of itself and the Coordination Group for Meteorological Satellites; Global Climate Observing System; Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; International Civil Aviation Organization; International Maritime Organization; WMO; and World Climate Research Programme.
		C.	Mandated events
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			11.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA took note of the information provided by its Chair on the mandated events being held in conjunction with this session. The Chair informed the SBSTA that, as part of the understanding reached on the adoption of the agenda (see para. ‎3 above), the matter of mountains and climate change would be considered at this session in the context of the 16th Focal Point Forum of the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, and that he would ensure that the issue of mountainous ecosystems was addressed with priority under the Nairobi work programme.
	III.	Matters relating to adaptation
(Agenda item 3)
		A.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3*
(Agenda sub-item 3(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				12.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 59 agenda sub-item 12(a) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Janine Felson (Belize) and Mattias Frumerie (Sweden).
				13.	At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below. Representatives of eight Parties made statements, including six on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group, AILAC, EIG, EU and its member States, LDCs and LMDCs.
			2.	Conclusions
				14.	The SBSTA and the SBI recommended that CMA 5 take up consideration of matters relating to the Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3 with a view to finalizing and adopting the framework referred to in paragraph 8 of decision 3/CMA.4.
		B.	Report of the Adaptation Committee and review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee*
(Agenda sub-item 3(b))
			15.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 59 agenda sub-item 12(b) in informal consultations co-facilitated by María del Pilar Bueno (Argentina) and Roberta Ianna (Italy).
			16.	At the 4th meeting, the Chair informed the SBSTA that Parties could not conclude consideration of this matter at this session. In accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBSTA 60 (June 2024).
	IV.	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 4)
		A.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts*
(Agenda sub-item 4(a))
			17.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 59 agenda sub-item 13(a) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Lucas Di Pietro (Argentina) and Cornelia Jaeger (Austria).
			18.	At their 4th meeting, the SBSTA and the SBI recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption by the appropriate governing body or bodies.,  A representative of one Party made a statement on behalf of EIG.
		B.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts*
(Agenda sub-item 4(b))
			19.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 59 agenda sub-item 13(b) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Lucas Di Pietro and Cornelia Jaeger.
			20.	At their 4th meeting, the SBSTA and the SBI recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption by the appropriate body or bodies.,  Representatives of three Parties made statements, including two on behalf of AILAC and the EU and its member States.
	V.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement*
(Agenda item 5)
		1.	Proceedings
			21.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 59 agenda item 8 in a contact group co-chaired by Alison Campbell (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) and Joseph Teo (Singapore). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			22.	The SBSTA and the SBI concluded their consideration of the first global stocktake under the Paris Agreement.
			23.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to forward their work on this matter as captured in the updated textual building blocks together with Parties’ views and submissions not yet fully reflected by the co-chairs of the joint contact group on the first global stocktake for further consideration at CMA 5.
			24.	The SBSTA and the SBI noted that the updated building blocks referred to in paragraph ‎‎23 above are not an agreed text and represent work in progress, noting that Parties’ views and submissions were not yet fully reflected and that a third iteration was expected. They requested their Chairs to convey the views expressed by Parties on the updated building blocks to the CMA for further consideration and invited the CMA to take into account the views and submissions in a third iteration of the updated building blocks.
	VI.	Research and systematic observation
(Agenda item 6)
		1.	Proceedings
			25.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this matter would be considered in informal consultations co-facilitated by Elizabeth Bush (Canada) and Patricia Nyinguro (Kenya). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			26.	The SBSTA recognized the vital importance of robust Earth observation systems and related long-term data records for enhanced understanding of changes in the global climate system and their attribution, mitigation and adaptation action, and early warning systems.
			27.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the information reported in the statements delivered at the joint opening plenary of SB 59 by representatives of the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites and the Coordination Group for Meteorological Satellites Joint Working Group on Climate, the Global Climate Observing System, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, WMO and the World Climate Research Programme.
			28.	The SBSTA took note of the WMO Provisional State of the Global Climate in 2023 report and the 2023 WMO Greenhouse Gas Bulletin and expressed alarm and utmost concern about the state of the global climate system, with record high GHG concentrations in 2022, and 2023 on track to be the warmest individual year on record. Furthermore, it welcomed the outcomes of the nineteenth session of the World Meteorological Congress.
			29.	The SBSTA took note of the informal summary report on Earth Information Day 2022. It expressed appreciation to the SBSTA Chair and Vice-Chair and the secretariat for organizing Earth Information Day 2023 and for its innovative new format, which aimed to provide an opportunity for direct engagement between the systematic observation community and end users of climate data and information. It thanked the representatives of the participating organizations and programmes for their valuable contributions and requested the SBSTA Chair, with the assistance of the secretariat, to prepare an informal summary report on the event.
			30.	The SBSTA noted the significant progress of the systematic observation community as presented at Earth Information Day 2023. It recognized the importance of sustained, long-term observations of the Earth system and the need to address data gaps, including in the atmosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere, ocean and coastal regions, tropical forests, and desert and mountain regions.
			31.	The SBSTA noted the new Global Greenhouse Gas Watch initiative, aimed at establishing sustained, routine global monitoring of GHG concentrations and fluxes. It recognized that this initiative is intended to improve the quantification of both natural and anthropogenic GHG sources and sinks, and to complement emission inventories, noting that reporting and GHG inventory guidelines are as adopted under the Convention and the Paris Agreement.
			32.	The SBSTA emphasized the urgent need to maintain and expand systematic observations in support of adaptation, as well as deliver Early Warnings for All, a key global initiative for protecting those most vulnerable to the impacts of extreme weather and climate events.
			33.	The SBSTA also emphasized the continued need to address gaps in systematic observations globally, noted with appreciation the support being provided for addressing gaps in systematic observations in developing countries and noted the continued efforts of the Systematic Observations Financing Facility. It encouraged Parties and relevant organizations to further strengthen their provision of support to the systematic observation community.
			34.	The SBSTA invited Parties and relevant organizations to submit views on possible themes for and ways to organize Earth Information Day 2024, to be held in conjunction with SBSTA 61 (November 2024), via the submission portal by 31 August 2024.
	VII.	Sharm el-Sheikh mitigation ambition and implementation work programme referred to in decision 4/CMA.4*
(Agenda item 7)
		1.	Proceedings
			35.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 59 agenda item 7 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Carlos Fuller (Belize) and Kay Harrison (New Zealand). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below. A representative of one Party made a statement on behalf of the EU and its member States.
		2.	Conclusions
			36.	The SBSTA and the SBI considered matters relating to the Sharm el-Sheikh mitigation ambition and implementation work programme referred to in decision 4/CMA.4.
			37.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to forward this matter to CMA 5 for further guidance taking into account the draft text prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda item.
	VIII.	Work programme on just transition pathways referred to in the relevant paragraphs of decision 1/CMA.4*
(Agenda item 8)
		1.	Proceedings
			38.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 59 agenda item 9 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Selam Kidane Abebe (Zambia) and Luisa Roelke (Germany). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			39.	The SBSTA and the SBI considered matters relating to the work programme on just transition pathways referred to in paragraphs 50–52 of decision 1/CMA.4.
			40.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to forward this matter to CMA 5 for further guidance taking into account the draft text prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda item, recognizing that this text does not represent consensus among Parties and further work under the CMA is necessary to finalize the decision.
	IX.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement*
(Agenda item 9)
		1.	Proceedings
			41.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 59 agenda item 10 in a contact group co-chaired by Catherine Goldberg (United States) and Peter Govindasamy (Singapore). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			42.	The SBSTA and the SBI convened a meeting of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
			43.	The SBSTA and the SBI did not conclude their consideration of matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement. The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to forward the matter to the COP, the CMP and the CMA for further guidance taking into account the draft text for this agenda item available on the UNFCCC website.
	X.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security*
(Agenda item 10)
		1.	Proceedings
			44.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 59 agenda item 11 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Annela Anger-Kraavi (Germany) and Una May Gordon (Dominica). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			45.	The SBSTA and the SBI continued consideration of the elements of the Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security.
			46.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SB 60 (June 2024) taking into account the document prepared at these sessions.
	XI.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network*
(Agenda item 11)
		47.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 59 agenda item 15 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Elfriede Anna More (Austria) and Vositha Wijenayake (Sri Lanka). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA recommended draft decisions for consideration and adoption at COP 28 and CMA 5. A representative of one Party made a statement.
	XII.	Methodological issues under the Convention 
(Agenda item 12)
		A.	Greenhouse gas data interface
(Agenda sub-item 12(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				48.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this matter would be considered in informal consultations co-facilitated by Thiago Mendes (Brazil) and Daniela Romano (Italy). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				49.	The SBSTA reaffirmed the importance of making GHG information easily accessible on the UNFCCC website and noted with appreciation the secretariat’s implementation of the necessary technical changes to the GHG data interface as requested at SBSTA 38.
				50.	The SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBSTA 60 subject to the availability of the tools for reporting under the enhanced transparency framework under the Paris Agreement.
		B.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport
(Agenda sub-item 12(b))
			51.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Martin Cames (Germany) and Pacifica Achieng Ogola (Kenya).
			52.	At the 4th meeting, the Chair informed the SBSTA that Parties could not conclude consideration of the matter at this session. In accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBSTA 60.
	XIII.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 13)
		A.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 2/CMA.3 
(Agenda sub-item 13(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				53.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this matter would be considered in informal consultations co-facilitated by Maria AlJishi (Saudi Arabia) and Peer Stiansen (Norway). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				54.	Pursuant to the request of the CMA, the SBSTA agreed to recommend to the CMA to consider the draft text on the UNFCCC website in its decision on guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, noting that the draft text being forwarded does not represent consensus among Parties.
		B.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement and referred to in decision 3/CMA.3 
(Agenda sub-item 13(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				55.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this matter would be considered in informal consultations co-facilitated by Kate Hancock (Australia) and Sonam Tashi (Bhutan). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				56.	Pursuant to the request of the CMA, the SBSTA agreed to recommend to the CMA to consider the draft text on the UNFCCC website in its decision on guidance on the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement, noting that the draft text being forwarded does not represent consensus among Parties.
		C.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 4/CMA.3 
(Agenda sub-item 13(c))
			1.	Proceedings
				57.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this matter would be considered in a contact group co-chaired by Kristin Qui (Trinidad and Tobago) and Jacqui Ruesga (New Zealand). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				58.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 4/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 9, agreed to forward information on the progress and outcomes of the work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 4/CMA.3 to the CMA as a report of the GCNMA. That report is contained in paragraphs ‎59–‎63 below.
				59.	The SBSTA convened GCNMA 3 and 4 in accordance with decision 4/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 5, and continued implementing the work programme activities referred to in decision 4/CMA.3, annex, chapter V, in accordance with decision 8/CMA.4, paragraph 3(a).
				60.	The SBSTA welcomed:
					(a)	The views and information provided by representatives of relevant constituted bodies and institutional arrangements under or serving the Convention and/or the Paris Agreement at GCNMA 3, held with the aim of enhancing collaboration between them and the GCNMA, thereby implementing the work programme activities referred to in decision 4/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 8(a)(ii)(b) and 8(b)(iii)(a);
					(b)	The broad participation of Parties and observers, including the 12 presentations made by them, at the in-session workshop held in conjunction with GCNMA 3 with the aim of exchanging information on non-market approaches, including best practices and lessons learned related to identifying, developing and implementing such approaches, and on non-market approaches for which financial, technology and capacity-building support may be required and the support available for them, thereby implementing the work programme activities referred to in decision 4/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 8(b)(ii);
					(c)	The broad participation of Parties and observers, including the nine presentations made by them and their engagement in round-table discussions, at the in-session workshop held in conjunction with GCNMA 4 on the matters referred to in paragraph 129(a–c) of document FCCC/SBSTA/2023/4, taking into consideration the views and information submitted by Parties and observers thereon via the submission portal and the synthesis report prepared by the secretariat, and in paragraph 130(b)(ii) of the same document, thereby implementing the work programme activities referred to in decision 4/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 8;
					(d)	The progress in operationalizing the UNFCCC web-based platform for recording and exchanging information on non-market approaches referred to in decision 4/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 8(b)(i), thereby implementing the work programme activities referred to in decision 4/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 8(b)(i);
					(e)	The use of spin-off groups at GCNMA 3, on the Joint Mitigation and Adaptation Mechanism for the Amazon region, and at GCNMA 4, on the process for recording and exchanging information on non-market approaches, the walk-through of the soft-launched UNFCCC web-based platform, and the consideration of best practices, lessons learned and case studies in relation to developing and implementing non-market approaches, thereby implementing the work programme activities referred to in decision4/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 8(b)(i–ii).
				61.	The SBSTA took note of:
					(a)	The report prepared by the secretariat on the in-session workshop held in conjunction with GCNMA 3 referred to in paragraph‎ 60(b) above, thereby implementing the work programme activities referred to in decision 4/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 8(b)(ii);
					(b)	The technical paper, without formal status, prepared by the secretariat on possibilities for enhancing engagement with public and private sector stakeholders at meetings of the GCNMA, thereby implementing the work programme activity referred to in decision 4/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 8(b)(ii)(c);
					(c)	The synthesis report prepared by the secretariat on the key elements of the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement, covering views and information submitted by Parties and observers on the work programme activities referred to in decision 4/CMA.3, annex, chapter V, the process for submitting and recording non-market approaches on the UNFCCC web-based platform referred to in decision 4/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 8(a–b), and possible topics for the next in-session workshop;
					(d)	The updates provided by the secretariat on the status of the development and operationalization of the UNFCCC web-based platform at GCNMA 3, including on the design work, timeline for completion and testing by interested Parties, and at GCNMA 4, which covered, inter alia, key functions following the full launch and the timeline for completion, thereby implementing the work programme activity referred to in decision 4/CMA.3, annex, paragraph 8(b)(i);
					(e)	Parties’ views on:
						i.	The in-session workshop referred to in paragraph‎ 60(b) above, including the need for more focused and balanced organization of the workshop in terms of time between presentations and the round-table discussions that formed part of the workshop in order to allow for an open exchange of views, and the positive outcomes of the workshop, including its provision of a networking opportunity for Parties participating in non-market approaches to identify and exchange information on these approaches and on best practices and lessons learned;
						ii.	The use of spin-off groups, including the need for more informal settings for the spin-off groups referred to in paragraph 60‎(e) above; improvements in the settings used for spin-off groups for in-depth discussion; and the usefulness of the spin-off groups, on an as-needed basis, to work through topics in detail and to reach shared understanding among Parties;
					(f)	The importance of the capacity-building programme referred to in decision 8/CMA.4, paragraph 21, for supporting the identification, development and implementation of non-market approaches.
				62.	The SBSTA encouraged the secretariat to complete the development and operationalization of the UNFCCC web-based platform referred to in paragraph 60(d) above by 31 January 2024.
				63.	The SBSTA forwarded a draft text on this matter, available on the UNFCCC website, recognizing that the text does not represent consensus among Parties and that further work by the CMA is necessary to finalize the decision for consideration and adoption at CMA 5.
	XIV.	Annual reports on technical reviews
(Agenda item 14)
		A.	Technical review of information reported under the Convention by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention in their biennial reports and national communications
(Agenda sub-item 14(a))
			64.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ole-Kenneth Nielsen (Denmark) and Marcelo Rocha (Brazil).
			65.	At the 4th meeting, the Chair informed the SBSTA that Parties could not conclude consideration of the matter at this session. In accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBSTA 60.
		B.	Technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 14(b))
			66.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ole-Kenneth Nielsen and Marcelo Rocha.
			67.	At the 4th meeting, the Chair informed the SBSTA that Parties could not conclude consideration of the matter at this session. In accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBSTA 60.
		C.	Technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I
(Agenda sub-item 14(c))
			68.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ole-Kenneth Nielsen and Marcelo Rocha.
			69.	At the 4th meeting, the Chair informed the SBSTA that Parties could not conclude consideration of the matter at this session. In accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBSTA 60.
	XV.	Other matters
(Agenda item 15)
		70.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. No other matters were raised.
	XVI.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 16)
		1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
			71.	At the 4th meeting, a representative of the secretariat informed the SBSTA that several activities resulting from the conclusions adopted at this session require additional resources over and above the core budget for the biennium 2024–2025, in the amount of EUR 275,000. Relevant requests for activities are contained in conclusions adopted under various SBSTA, including joint SBSTA–SBI, agenda items.
			72.	Under joint SBSTA agenda sub-item 4(b) and SBI agenda sub-item 13(b), “Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts”, supplementary funding of EUR 215,000 will be required in 2024 to develop draft guidelines on preventing conflicts of interest in relation to the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change and to facilitate the continued provision of technical assistance under the Santiago network.
			73.	Under joint SBSTA agenda item 11 and SBI agenda item 15, “Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network”, supplementary funding of EUR 60,000 will be required in 2024–2025 to support the Technology Mechanism initiative on artificial intelligence for climate action, which includes preparing a technical paper on artificial intelligence for climate action in developing countries.
			74.	The representative of the secretariat noted that amounts presented are preliminary and based on information available at the time. The representative also noted that the secretariat is counting on Parties to provide supplementary funding for these activities in a timely and predictable manner, as without such contributions the secretariat will not be in a position to provide the requested support.
			75.	The representative concluded by noting that costs for 2026 and beyond will be reviewed in the context of preparing the budget for the biennium 2026–2027.
		2.	Closure of and report on the session
			76.	At the 3rd meeting of the SBSTA, which was held jointly with the 3rd meeting of SBI 59, on 6 December, statements were made by representatives of 15 Parties, including 12 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; AILAC; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Coalition for Rainforest Nations; EIG; EU and its member States; Group of 77 and China; LDCs; LMDCs; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of eight UNFCCC constituencies: business and industry, children and youth, environmental, farmers and agricultural, and trade union non-governmental organizations; Indigenous Peoples organizations; local governmental and municipal authorities; and women and gender constituency.
			77.	At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session and make it available to Parties.
			78.	At the end of the 4th meeting, the Chair thanked Parties and observers for their constructive engagement throughout the session. He also thanked the co-chairs and co-facilitators for their work and the other presiding officers for their close collaboration. The Chair then closed the session.
		
