|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBSTA/2018/4 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 3 July 2018   Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on the first part of its forty-eighth session, held in Bonn from 30 April to 10 May 2018
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session  
		(Agenda item 1)		1–2	3
		II.	Organizational matters 
		(Agenda item 2)		3–11	3
		A.	Adoption of the agenda 		3–4	3
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		5–8	4
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair		9–10	5
		D.	Mandated events		11	5
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change
		(Agenda item 3)		12–28	5
		IV.	Report of the Adaptation Committee
		(Agenda item 4)		29–32	8
		V.	Development and transfer of technologies: technology framework under 
		Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement  
		(Agenda item 5)		33–37	9
		VI.	Research and systematic observation 
		(Agenda item 6)		38–54	10
		VII.	Local communities and indigenous peoples platform 
		(Agenda item 7)		55–58	12
		VIII.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture 
		(Agenda item 8)		59–67	12
		IX.	Impact of the implementation of response measures  
		(Agenda item 9)		68–80	13
		A.	Improved forum and work programme		68–75	13
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement 
			of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures  		76–79	14
		C.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol		80	15
		
			Paragraph	Page
		X.	Methodological issues under the Convention  
		(Agenda item 10)		81–92	15
		A.	Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories 
			for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		81–85	15
		B.	Guidelines for the technical review of information reported under the 
			Convention related to greenhouse gas inventories, biennial reports and 
			national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		86–91	16
		C.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport		92	17
		XI.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol: land use, land-use change 
		and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and 
		under the clean development mechanism
	 	(Agenda item 11)		93–94	17
		XII.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement  
		(Agenda item 12)		95–106	18
		A.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, 
			of the Paris Agreement		95–98	18
		B.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by 
			Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement		99–102	18
		C.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches 
			referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement		103–106	19
		XIII.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized 
		through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, 
		of the Paris Agreement 
		(Agenda item 13)		107–110	19
		XIV.	Cooperation with other international organizations 
		(Agenda item 14)		111–112	20
		XV.	Other matters  
		(Agenda item 15)		113	20
		XVI.	Closure of and report on the session  
		(Agenda item 16)		114–121	20
		Annexes
		I.	Koronivia road map		22
		II.	Scope of the review of the work of the improved forum		24
		
		
		
		
	I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)
		1.	The first part of the forty-eighth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held at the World Conference Center Bonn in Bonn, Germany, from 30 April to 10 May 2018.
		2.	The Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Paul Watkinson (France), opened the session on Monday, 30 April, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Ms. Annela Anger-Kraavi (Estonia) as Vice-Chair of the SBSTA and Mr. Aderito Manuel Fernandes Santana (Sao Tome and Principe) as Rapporteur.
	II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
			3.	At its 1st meeting, on 30 April, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive 	Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBSTA/2018/1).
			4.	The agenda was adopted as follows:
			1.	Opening of the session.
			2.	Organizational matters:
				(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
				(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
				(c)	Election of officers other than the Chair;
				(d)	Mandated events.
			3.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate 				change.
			4.	Report of the Adaptation Committee.
				5.	Development and transfer of technologies: technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
			6.	Research and systematic observation.
			7.	Local communities and indigenous peoples platform.
			8.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture.
			9.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
				(a)	Improved forum and work programme;
					(b)	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures;
				(c)	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol.
			10.	Methodological issues under the Convention:
				(a)	Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(b)	Guidelines for the technical review of information reported under the Convention related to greenhouse gas inventories, biennial reports and national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(c)	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime 		transport.
				11.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol: land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development mechanism.
				12.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement:
					(a)	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement;
					(b)	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement;
					(c)	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement.
				13.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement.
			14.	Cooperation with other international organizations.
			15.	Other matters.
			16.	Closure of and report on the session.
		B.	Organization of the work of the session 
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			5.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. The Chair drew attention to the deadline for all groups to conclude their work by 6 p.m. on Tuesday, 8 May, to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary, which was to be convened on Thursday, 10 May. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to proceed on that basis and in line with previously adopted conclusions of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices. Statements were made on behalf of two Parties. Statements were also made on behalf of nine intergovernmental organizations, namely the Global Climate Observing System, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (IOC-UNESCO), the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), UN-Oceans, the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the International Maritime Organization (IMO).
			6.	At the 2nd meeting of the SBSTA, on 30 April, which was held jointly with the 2nd meeting of the SBI and the 13th meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Paris Agreement (APA), statements were made by representatives of 21 Parties, including 14 on behalf of groups of Parties, namely: the African Group; the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS); the Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China (the BASIC countries); the Coalition for Rainforest Nations; the Environmental Integrity Group (EIG); the European Union (EU) and its member States; the Group of 77 and China (G77 and China); the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; the least developed countries; the Like-minded Developing Countries (LMDCs); and the Umbrella Group. Statements were also made on behalf of business and industry non-governmental organizations (NGOs), environmental NGOs, indigenous peoples organizations, local government and municipal authorities, research and independent NGOs, trade union NGOs, women and gender NGOs and youth NGOs.
			7.	On 5 May, the SBSTA Chair, the SBI Chair and the APA Co-Chairs convened a joint informal plenary to inform Parties on progress in the work of the SBSTA, the SBI and the APA pertaining to the implementation of the Paris Agreement work programme (PAWP). The joint informal plenary was organized in response to Parties’ request to address the linkages in the work of the subsidiary bodies on the implementation of the PAWP and to manage work under the PAWP in a coherent and balanced manner.
			8.	At the 4th meeting of the SBSTA, on 10 May, which was held jointly with the 4th meeting of the SBI and the 15th meeting of the APA, closing statements were heard (see para. 120 below).
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			9.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting, on 10 May. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled rule 27 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, whereby the SBSTA was expected to elect its Vice-Chair and Rapporteur. At the same meeting, the SBSTA noted that the consultations on the nominations were ongoing.
			10.	At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA was informed that no nominations had been received for Vice-Chair and Rapporteur and that the current Vice-Chair and Rapporteur would remain in office pending completion of the elections by the SBSTA.
		D.	Mandated events
(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
			11.	The following mandated events took place at the session:
				(a)	Technical examination processes on mitigation and adaptation;
				(b)	The tenth meeting of the research dialogue;
				(c)	A multi-stakeholder workshop on the local communities and indigenous peoples platform; and
				(d)	An in-forum training workshop on economic modelling.
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change
(Agenda item 3)
			1.	Proceedings
				12.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2018/INF.1 and the submissions related to the agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Julio Cordano (Chile) and Ms. Beth Lavender (Canada). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				13.	The SBSTA welcomed the progress, highlighted by the following documents and activities, in implementing activities under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change (NWP) under the overall guidance of the SBSTA Chair:
					(a)	The report on progress in implementing activities under the NWP;
					(b)	The synthesis report summarizing the outcomes of the work undertaken under the NWP since SBSTA 44;
					(c)	The synthesis report on human settlements and adaptation, containing key findings and ways forward, prepared in collaboration with experts and expert organizations;
					(d)	The side event on human settlements and adaptation held at this session, which provided a valuable opportunity for knowledge-sharing with expert practitioners and the co-production of usable knowledge products, and led to an action pledge by ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability to convene an annual meeting on cities and climate change science.
				14.	The SBSTA welcomed the mobilization of global and regional partners to identify, communicate and bridge priority knowledge gaps in six subregions as part of the pilot phase of the Lima Adaptation Knowledge Initiative (LAKI).
				15.	The SBSTA recognized the contributions of the NWP and its partner organizations to the work of the Adaptation Committee (AC) and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG), demonstrating the unique ability of the NWP to provide relevant technical information in response to emerging knowledge needs.
				16.	Having reviewed the NWP at this session, the SBSTA concluded that the NWP has successfully responded to its mandates, and encouraged it to continue enhancing its role as a knowledge-for-action hub for adaptation and resilience with a view to further improving the relevance and effectiveness of the NWP in the light of the Paris Agreement.
				17.	The SBSTA welcomed the next phase of LAKI, which is being undertaken with a view to narrowing the priority adaptation knowledge gaps identified in the six subregions and scaling up to additional subregions.
				18.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to further encourage the ongoing engagement of NWP partner organizations in key thematic areas to drive forward activities that produce usable knowledge products and catalyse action in response to identified knowledge needs, including in relation to:
					(a)	The process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans (NAPs), in cooperation with the LEG;
					(b)	Facilitating and enhancing national, regional and local adaptation actions, encouraging cooperation and coordination between regional and local stakeholders and improving the flow of information between the Convention process and national, regional and local activities, including through:
						(i)	Regional events and workshops organized in collaboration with NWP partner organizations and on the margins of events held by the secretariat, Parties or NWP partner organizations, including NAP Expos, regional technical expert meetings on adaptation and the Global Adaptation Network Forums;
						(ii)	Enhancing the user-friendliness of the adaptation knowledge portal;
						(iii)	Utilizing online communication tools such as webinars, webcasts and social media channels.
				19.	The SBSTA invited the AC to facilitate collaboration through modalities in accordance with decision 2/CP.17 in order to provide advice on the delivery of NWP mandates that relate to the work programmes of constituted bodies, and on opportunities to align efforts with relevant bodies, workstreams and institutional arrangements, including in relation to the following:
					(a)	Exploring opportunities for engaging the NWP and its partner organizations in activities such as the technical examination process on adaptation and the Marrakech Partnership for Global Climate Action;
					(b)	Providing recommendations on enhancing the NWP as:
						(i)	The knowledge-for-action hub for adaptation and resilience serving relevant bodies and institutional arrangements under the Convention, as appropriate and as requested;
						(ii)	The intermediary between the Parties and experts to help the Parties to better define their knowledge needs and to help experts to better respond to those needs within the framework of the Convention;
					(c)	Building on the adaptation knowledge portal, mapping and regularly tracking the activities of NWP partner organizations related to themes and activities under the NWP, and the activities of organizations engaged in the technical examination process on adaptation and the Marrakech Partnership for Global Climate Action with a view to suggesting ways to enhance coherence and avoid duplication of efforts undertaken;
					(d)	Enhancing coherence between the adaptation work under the NWP and the goals and objectives of other global frameworks such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030;
					(e)	Identifying the themes of the 13th and subsequent NWP Focal Point Forums;
					(f)	Reporting on progress on the activities referred to in paragraph 19(a–e) above through its annual report.
				20.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to continue seeking opportunities for continuous engagement with relevant NWP partner organizations and other organizations in order to enable the provision of expert guidance in existing and future thematic areas according to the needs of the Parties, building on experience, partnerships formed and knowledge generated under the NWP.
				21.	The SBSTA concluded that future NWP thematic areas should focus on emerging issues in relation to climate change such as:
					(a)	Extreme weather events such as heatwaves, flash floods, sand and dust storms, cyclones and heavy precipitation;
					(b)	Oceans, coastal areas and ecosystems, including mega deltas, coral reefs and mangroves;
					(c)	Drought, water scarcity and land degradation neutrality;
					(d)	Agriculture and food security;
					(e)	Slow onset events;
					(f)	Forests and grasslands;
					(g)	Wetlands;
					(h)	Rural systems and communities;
					(i)	Cities and urban systems;
					(j)	Livelihood and socioeconomic dimensions in relevant sectors such as tourism.
				22.	The SBSTA invited the NWP and partner organizations to facilitate the compilation and dissemination of information on monitoring tools and assessment methods to assist Parties, in particular developing country Parties, in accordance with decision 2/CP.11, with the following:
					(a)	Methods, tools, data, observations and systems for economic, ecosystem and climate modelling and scenarios, inter alia, related to vulnerability and climate risk assessment;
					(b)	Mobilization of knowledge resources in collaboration with relevant organizations.
				23.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize the 12th NWP Focal Point Forum in conjunction with SBSTA 49 (December 2018) on the topic of economic diversification.
				24.	The SBSTA expressed its appreciation to the Governments of Canada and Japan and the EU for providing financial support for the implementation of activities under the NWP.
				25.	The SBSTA invited Parties, NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations to provide financial and in-kind support, as appropriate, for the implementation of activities under the NWP.
				26.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 17–23 above and requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
				27.	The SBSTA concluded that henceforth it would consider matters related to the NWP at its first regular session of the year, and requested the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, to prepare a concise annual report with an executive summary on progress in implementing activities under the NWP for consideration by the SBSTA at those sessions.
				28.	The SBSTA also concluded that it would take stock of the operational and institutional modalities of the NWP at SBSTA 56 (June 2022) with a view to assessing the performance and effectiveness of the NWP at addressing knowledge needs relevant to the implementation of the Paris Agreement, and that it would determine the modalities of the stocktake at SBSTA 54 (May–June 2021).
	IV.	Report of the Adaptation Committee 
(Agenda item 4)
		1.	Proceedings
			29.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and at its 4th meeting, on 8 May. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the agenda item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 48 agenda item 11 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Patience Damptey (Ghana) and Ms. Gabriela Fischerova (Slovakia).
			30.	The SBSTA also agreed that the group established under this agenda item would meet jointly with the group established under SBI 48 agenda item 12, “Matters relating to the least developed countries”, to consider the joint recommendations prepared by the LEG and the AC for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) at its first session (December 2018) in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 41 and 45. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			31.	The SBI and the SBSTA continued their consideration of the work of the AC in response to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 42, as well as its work, together with the LEG, in response to decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 41 and 45. They welcomed the progress made in advancing the deliberations on these matters, as captured in the revised informal notes by the co-facilitators.
			32.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue their consideration of these matters on the basis of the revised informal notes referred to in paragraph 31 above at SBSTA 48.2 and SBI 48.2 (September 2018) with a view to making a recommendation to be forwarded by the Conference of the Parties (COP) at its twenty-fourth session (December 2018) for consideration and adoption at CMA 1.
	V.	Development and transfer of technologies: technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 5)
		1.	Proceedings
			33.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it an informal document prepared by the SBSTA Chair. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize) and Ms. Mette Moglestue (Norway). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			34.	The SBSTA continued its deliberations on the elaboration of the technology framework established under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
			35.	The SBSTA welcomed with appreciation the initial draft of the technology framework prepared by its Chair as requested at SBSTA 47.
			36.	The SBSTA noted the progress and the discussions among Parties regarding the technology framework at this session.
			37.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its elaboration of the technology framework, including its structure, at SBSTA 48.2 using the updated draft of the technology framework.
	VI.	Research and systematic observation
(Agenda item 6)
		1.	Proceedings
			38.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Christiane Textor (Germany) and Mr. Fred Kossam (Malawi). Statements were made by representatives of the Global Climate Observing System, IOC-UNESCO, the IPCC, UN-Oceans, WCRP and WMO. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below. A statement was made by a representative of the EU.
		2.	Conclusions
			39.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the activities and information reported in the statements delivered by the representatives of the Global Climate Observing System, IOC-UNESCO, the IPCC, UN-Oceans, WCRP and WMO.
			40.	The SBSTA welcomed the summary report on the ninth meeting of the research dialogue prepared by the SBSTA Chair.
			41.	The SBSTA noted the views and considerations submitted by Parties on possible topics for the tenth and future meetings of the research dialogue. It also noted the information note on the tenth meeting of the research dialogue (RD 10) prepared by the SBSTA Chair.
			42.	The SBSTA welcomed RD 10, held on 3 May 2018, its aim to promote discussion at the science–policy interface and its four themes:
				(a)	Science for understanding – update on research and modelling on human settlements, oceans and land and their importance for the implementation of the Paris Agreement;
				(b)	Science for action – strengthening the link between the research community and action to meet the goals of the Paris Agreement;
				(c)	Renewable energy economics and co-benefits;
				(d)	Global research on the carbon cycle and its observation requirements in support of the Paris Agreement.
			43.	The SBSTA expressed its appreciation to Parties and all participating research programmes and organizations and their representatives for their contributions to RD 10. It welcomed the diverse and informative set of posters and presentations at the meeting and the value of the dialogue and the exchange of information.
			44.	The SBSTA acknowledged the ongoing efforts of the IPCC in the sixth assessment cycle and recalled decision 1/CP.23.
			45.	The SBSTA noted the importance of the progress of the WCRP Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 for the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report and the WCRP Coordinated Regional Downscaling Experiment for climate services.
			46.	The SBSTA also noted the important work of the scientific community, including at the CitiesIPCC Cities and Climate Change Science Conference, on understanding the complex role played by cities in strengthening the global response to climate change.
			47.	The SBSTA further noted the importance of the work of the scientific community and the IPCC under the themes of RD 10 referred to in paragraph 42 above. It encouraged Parties and relevant organizations to address gaps and needs with regard to:
				(a)	Increasing open access to climate-relevant data;
				(b)	The vulnerabilities of terrestrial, marine, coastal and urban ecosystems to climate change and the value of ecosystem-based approaches, particularly synergies of mitigation and adaptation action and related co-benefits;
				(c)	The rapid changes in the renewable energy landscape and the implications for the assessment of mitigation options and their co-benefits;
				(d)	The role of the ocean in the global climate system, including for the global energy balance and carbon cycle, and impacts related to, inter alia, ocean acidification, sea level rise and ecosystem services, noting the proclamation by the United Nations of the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development (2021–2030), which is to be coordinated by IOC-UNESCO;
				(e)	The recent and ongoing rapid changes in the Arctic region;
				(f)	The analysis of the global carbon cycle;
				(g)	Research, as identified under other agenda items and by constituted bodies under the Convention.
			48.	The SBSTA noted the urgency for enhanced science communication. It welcomed the work of the scientific community on science communication, including some examples reported at RD 10, to support action under the Paris Agreement.
			49.	The SBSTA noted the importance of regional institutions and networks and the importance of providing and exchanging knowledge at the regional, national and local level. The SBSTA also noted that regional initiatives on science communication would be valuable, organized in close collaboration with regional research organizations and networks and other relevant stakeholders, subject to the availability of financial resources. It urged Parties to continue to engage with the scientific community.
			50.	The SBSTA encouraged Parties to support transdisciplinary research to enable engagement of the scientific community with the policy community and other relevant stakeholders and communities for informed actions under the Paris Agreement.
			51.	The SBSTA noted the importance of indigenous and traditional knowledge in relevant aspects of scientific data and research and in communication at the science–policy interface.
			52.	The SBSTA recognized the importance of continued and enhanced support for climate change research, including enhancing research capacity, particularly in developing countries.
			53.	The SBSTA requested its Chair to produce a summary report on RD 10 and to make it available prior to SBSTA 50 (June 2019).
			54.	The SBSTA invited Parties to submit their views on possible topics and considerations for the meetings of the research dialogue to be held in conjunction with SBSTA 50 and beyond via the submission portal by 15 January 2019. Submissions should take into account the themes addressed and presentations made at previous research dialogue meetings and the themes suggested for future meetings, which are listed in the annex to the information note referred to in paragraph 41 above.
	VII.	Local communities and indigenous peoples platform
(Agenda item 7)
		1.	Proceedings
			55.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Anger-Kraavi and Mr. Fuller. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below. Statements were made by representatives of eight Parties, including on behalf of the EU and its member States, and the G77 and China.
		2.	Conclusions
			56.	The SBSTA acknowledged the fruitful exchange that took place during the in-session multi-stakeholder workshop on implementing the functions of the Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform.
			57.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the support provided by the Nordic Council of Ministers for work under the platform and the support provided by Canada for the workshop referred to in paragraph 56 above.
			58.	The SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBSTA 49 on the basis of the draft decision text proposed by the co-facilitators of the informal consultations on this agenda item.
		VIII.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture
(Agenda item 8)
			1.	Proceedings
				59.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the agenda item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 48 agenda item 10 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Heikki Granholm (Finland) and Ms. Milagros Sandoval (Peru). A statement was made by a representative of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				60.	The SBI and the SBSTA, recalling Articles 9 and 10 of the Convention and in accordance with decision 4/CP.23, initiated the Koronivia joint work on agriculture (KJWA), taking into consideration the vulnerabilities of agriculture to climate change and approaches to addressing food security. They welcomed the submissions from Parties and observers on elements to be included in this work.
				61.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize the workshops referred to in annex I in conjunction with the specified sessions. They encouraged admitted observers to participate in these workshops.
				62.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the importance of issues, including but not limited to farmers, gender, youth, local communities and indigenous peoples, and encouraged Parties to take them into consideration when making submissions and during the KJWA workshops.
				63.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare a report on each workshop referred to in annex I for consideration at the sessions of the SBI and the SBSTA following the sessions in conjunction with which the workshops took place.
				64.	The SBI and the SBSTA, pursuant to decision 4/CP.23, paragraph 1, also requested the secretariat to invite representatives of the constituted bodies under the Convention to contribute to the work and attend the workshops, in particular the first workshop, on decision 4/CP.23, paragraph 2(a).
				65.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal, for each workshop referred to in annex I, their views on the subject of that workshop by the deadline specified in annex I. They also invited Parties and observers to submit, by 28 September 2020, their views on future topics not listed in decision 4/CP.23 and on the progress of the KJWA for consideration in the report of the SBI and the SBSTA to the COP as per decision 4/CP.23, paragraph 4.
				66.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of this agenda item at SBI 49 and SBSTA 49 (December 2018).
				67.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 61 above. They requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	IX.	Impact of the implementation of response measures 
(Agenda item 9)
		A.	Improved forum and work programme
(Agenda sub-item 9(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				68.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 48 agenda sub-item 17(a). The SBSTA also agreed that its Chair and the Chair of the SBI, Mr. Emmanuel Dlamini (Eswatini), would convene the 5th meeting of the improved forum as a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Nataliya Kushko (Ukraine) and Mr. Andrei Marcu (Panama). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				69.	The SBSTA and the SBI convened the 5th meeting of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				70.	The SBSTA and the SBI expressed their gratitude to the experts from both developed and developing countries, as well as from intergovernmental and international organizations, for their technical contribution to the in-forum training workshop convened from 30 April to 1 May 2018 on the use of economic modelling tools related to the areas of the work programme of the improved forum. The SBSTA and the SBI requested the secretariat to prepare a report on the workshop for consideration at SBSTA 49 and SBI 49.
				71.	The SBSTA and the SBI took note of the views expressed by Parties and observers, contained in their submissions, on the scope of the review of the work of the improved forum that will take place at SBSTA 49 and SBI 49.
				72.	The SBSTA and the SBI also took note of the in-forum discussions of Parties on the scope and process of the review of the work of the improved forum, informed by the submissions referred to in paragraph 71 above. The SBSTA and the SBI agreed on the scope of the review as contained in the annex II, which serves as the guide for the review of the work of the improved forum.
				73.	The SBSTA and the SBI invited Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal, by 21 September 2018, their views on the work of the improved forum on the basis of the agreed scope of the review as contained in annex II, and requested the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report based on the submissions with a view to informing Parties’ discussions on the review of the work of the improved forum referred to in paragraph 71 above.
				74.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to conduct a one-day review of the work of the improved forum in conjunction with SBSTA 49 and SBI 49 with a view to concluding the review of the work of the improved forum.
				75.	The SBSTA and the SBI noted that the decision on the forum serving the Paris Agreement will be taken at CMA 1.3 (December 2018) as part of the PAWP, at which time the forum will begin serving the Paris Agreement. The SBSTA and the SBI also noted that the outcome of the review of the improved forum, as outlined in decision 11/CP.21, will inform the work programme and modalities for the forum serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement. The SBSTA and the SBI further noted that at SBSTA 49 and SBI 49 Parties will identify new activities to implement the work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures 
(Agenda sub-item 9(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				76.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it an informal document prepared by the SBSTA and SBI Chairs. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 48 agenda sub-item 17(b) and that it would establish a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Kushko and Mr. Marcu. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				77.	The SBSTA and the SBI continued to deliberate, on the basis of the informal document prepared by their Chairs, on the modalities, work programme and functions of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures under the Paris Agreement, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 34, and at the request of SBSTA 47 and SBI 47.
				78.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to continue work on this matter at SBSTA 48.2 and SBI 48.2 on the basis of the revised version of the SBSTA and SBI Chairs’ informal document as prepared by the co-chairs of the contact group on these agenda sub-items at SBSTA 48 and SBI 48. They noted that the content of the revised SBSTA and SBI Chairs’ informal document does not represent consensus among Parties.
				79.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed that the recommendation being prepared under the relevant agenda sub-items for consideration and adoption at CMA 1 will include language for the CMA to take the necessary procedural steps to enable the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures to serve the Paris Agreement as per decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 33 and 34.
		C.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 9(c))
			80.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to the Chair’s proposal that substantive discussions under this sub-item be held in the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures jointly with discussions on agenda sub-item 9 (a). At the 3rd meeting, the Chair informed the SBSTA that no specific conclusions had been reached on the matter. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBSTA 49.
		X.	Methodological issues under the Convention 
(Agenda item 10)
			A.	Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 10(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					81.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Riitta Pipatti (Finland) and Mr. Washington Zhakata (Zimbabwe). At the 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					82.	The SBSTA continued its consideration of this matter. It welcomed the information submitted by Parties on their experience of and views on reporting on harvested wood products.
					83.	The SBSTA also welcomed the updates provided by Parties on their experience of using the IPCC 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands (hereinafter referred to as the Wetlands Supplement) for their greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory reporting. It encouraged Parties to continue gaining experience in using the Wetlands Supplement for their GHG inventory reporting.
					84.	The SBSTA discussed the reporting of carbon dioxide emission and removal estimates relating to harvested wood products, including Parties’ experience of reporting those estimates and in linking them with forest land estimates, taking into account the submissions referred to in paragraph 82 above. It noted the importance of the discussions to advancing understanding of the different approaches set out in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories and the potential implications of the use of different approaches for overestimating or underestimating emissions and removals from harvested wood products.
					85.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBSTA 51 (November 2019).
				B.	Guidelines for the technical review of information reported under the Convention related to greenhouse gas inventories, biennial reports and national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 10(b))
					1.	Proceedings
						86.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Pipatti and Mr. Zhakata. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
					2.	Conclusions
						87.	At the request of the COP, the SBSTA considered the experience of conducting desk reviews of GHG inventories taking into consideration the relevant conclusions from the meetings of GHG inventory lead reviewers up to 2017.
						88.	Noting the conclusions from the 15th meeting of GHG inventory lead reviewers, the SBSTA welcomed the information on the improvements in conducting desk reviews and recognized that ensuring a sufficient number of experts for desk reviews has been a challenge for the secretariat.
						89.	The SBSTA invited Parties to encourage and facilitate the participation of their nominated experts in desk reviews to enable the secretariat to organize desk reviews with the sufficient number of experts and ensure geographical balance in the expert review teams.
						90.	The SBSTA noted from the conclusions from the meetings of lead reviewers referred to in paragraph 87 above that the organization of desk reviews has benefited from the actions proposed in those conclusions. The SBSTA invited GHG inventory lead reviewers to continue considering at their meetings the experience of conducting desk reviews and suggesting how to improve the operationalization of the reviews.
						91.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBSTA 51.
				C.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport 
(Agenda sub-item 10(c))
					Proceedings
						92.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it the submissions from ICAO and IMO related to the agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that its Chair would consult with interested Parties on the matter and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA. Statements were made by representatives of ICAO and IMO. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA noted that Parties had not been able to agree on conclusions; in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, this sub-item will be on the provisional agenda for the next session (SBSTA 49, December 2018). Statements were made by representatives of 14 Parties, including on behalf of the African Group, the BASIC countries, the EIG, the EU and its member States, the G77 and China, and the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean.,
	XI.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol: land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development mechanism
(Agenda item 11)
		1.	Proceedings
			93.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Walter Oyhantcabal (Uruguay) and Ms. Paula Perälä (Finland). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			94.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this agenda item at SBSTA 50 with a view to recommending draft decisions on this matter in relation to the work programmes referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraphs 6, 7 and 10, for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) at its fifteenth session (November 2019) and to reporting to the CMP on the outcomes of the work programme referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraph 5, at the same session.
	XII.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 12)
		A.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 12(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				95.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it an informal document prepared by the SBSTA Chair. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Kelley Kizzier (Ireland) and Mr. Hugh Sealy (Maldives). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below. Statements were made by representatives of four Parties, including on behalf of AOSIS.
			2.	Conclusions
				96.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 36, continued to elaborate the guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement.
				97.	The SBSTA took note of the informal document containing draft elements of the guidance on cooperative approaches prepared by the SBSTA Chair in response to the request at SBSTA 47 and the revised informal note prepared by the co-chairs of the contact group on this agenda sub-item.
				98.	The SBSTA agreed to continue the discussions at SBSTA 48.2 on the basis of the revised informal note referred to in paragraph 97 above, noting that the revised informal note does not represent a consensus or reflect all the views of Parties.
		B.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda sub-item 12(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				99.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it an informal document prepared by the SBSTA Chair. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Kizzier and Mr. Sealy. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				100.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 38, continued to elaborate the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
				101.	The SBSTA took note of the informal document containing draft elements of the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism prepared by the SBSTA Chair in response to the request at SBSTA 47 and the revised informal note prepared by the co-chairs of the contact group on this agenda sub-item.
				102.	The SBSTA agreed to continue the discussions at SBSTA 48.2 on the basis of the revised informal note referred to in paragraph 101 above, noting that the revised informal note does not represent a consensus or reflect all the views of Parties.
		C.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 12(c))
			1.	Proceedings
				103.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it an informal document prepared by the SBSTA Chair. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Kizzier and Mr. Sealy. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				104.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 40, continued to elaborate the draft decision on the work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement.
				105.	The SBSTA took note of the informal document containing draft elements of the draft decision on the work programme prepared by the SBSTA Chair in response to the request at SBSTA 47 and the revised informal note prepared by the co-chairs of the contact group on this agenda sub-item.
				106.	The SBSTA agreed to continue the discussions at SBSTA 48.2 on the basis of the revised informal note referred to in paragraph 105 above, noting that the revised informal note does not represent a consensus or reflect all the views of Parties.
	XIII.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 13)
		1.	Proceedings
			107.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda item in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Delphine Eyraud (France) and Mr. Seyni Nafo (Mali). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			108.	The SBSTA welcomed the work on the modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement, as reflected in the informal note by the co-chairs of the contact group on this matter.
			109.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its work on this matter at SBSTA 48.2, building on, but not limited to, the informal note referred to in paragraph 108 above, views and submissions made, and to forward the outcomes to COP 24 with a view to the COP making a recommendation for consideration and adoption at CMA 1.
			110.	The SBSTA requested its Chair to continue consultations with the Co-Chairs of the APA with a view to avoiding overlap and duplication and ensuring the timely incorporation of the modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions developed by the SBSTA into the modalities, procedures and guidelines to be developed by the APA under its agenda item 5, “Modalities, procedures and guidelines for the transparency framework for action and support referred to in Article 13 of the Paris Agreement”.
	XIV.	Cooperation with other international organizations
(Agenda item 14)
		1.	Proceedings
			111.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2018/INF.2. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that its Chair would consult with interested Parties on the matter and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			112.	The SBSTA welcomed the summary of the secretariat’s cooperative activities with other intergovernmental organizations since SBSTA 46.
	XV.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 15)
		113.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. No matters were raised under this agenda item. Statements were made by representatives of three Parties, including on behalf of the LMDCs.
		XVI.	Closure of and report on the session 
(Agenda item 16)
			1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
				114.	At the 3rd meeting of the SBSTA, the UNFCCC Deputy Executive Secretary provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during this session, in accordance with the provisions of rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
				115.	He informed Parties that the SBSTA had not made a request at this session with budgetary implications over and above the core budget for the biennium 2018–2019. The estimated cost of activities requested by the SBSTA under agenda item 8, “Koronivia joint work on agriculture” (EUR 30,000 for six workshop reports), will be covered by existing core budget resources.
				116.	He also informed the SBSTA that, pursuant to paragraphs 5–9 of decision 1/CP.23, the COP 23 President, in consultation with the COP Bureau and the Co-Chairs of the APA, had assessed the need for an additional negotiating session to facilitate the timely completion of the work under the PAWP and that it had been decided that the session will be held in Bangkok in September 2018. The total estimated cost of the additional session amounts to EUR 2.6 million. While most of the participation cost for the session is covered, a total of EUR 1.5 million is still required under the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities to cover the logistical arrangements for the session.
				117.	The Deputy Executive Secretary took the opportunity to inform Parties that, with regard to COP 24, an amount of EUR 2.2 million has yet to be secured under the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process to enable the participation of representatives of eligible Parties.
				118.	He noted that these amounts were preliminary and based on the information available at that time. He expressed the hope that the secretariat can count on the continued generosity of Parties to provide additional funding in a timely and predictable manner. He also noted that without supplementary contributions the secretariat will not be in a position to make the required arrangements.
			2.	Closure of and report on the session
				119.	At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the draft report on the first part of the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session and to make it available to all Parties. At the same meeting, the Chair thanked Parties, co-chairs, co-facilitators and the secretariat for their support.
				120.	At its 4th meeting, which was held jointly with the 4th meeting of the SBI and the 15th meeting of the APA, the SBSTA heard statements from Parties and observers. Statements were made by representatives of 19 Parties, including 14 on behalf of groups of Parties, namely: the African Group; AOSIS; the Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; the BASIC countries, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; the Coalition for Rainforest Nations; the EIG; the EU and its member States; the G77 and China; the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; the least developed countries; the Like-minded Developing Countries; and the Umbrella Group. Statements were also made on behalf of environmental NGOs, indigenous peoples organizations, local government and municipal authorities, research and independent NGOs, women and gender NGOs and youth NGOs.
				121.	At the end of the joint plenary, following the determination that an additional negotiating session is needed (see para. 116 above), SBSTA 48 was suspended. It will be resumed in Bangkok in conjunction with the resumed sessions of the SBI and the APA to address matters relating to the PAWP in accordance with annex I to decision 1/CP.23.
Annex I
Koronivia road map
	| Session | Activity |
	| SBSTA/SBI 48 April–May 2018 | Parties agree on the road map/agenda |
	|  | Intersessional 
activities | Submissions on topic 2(a)a (Modalities for implementation of the outcomes of the five in-session workshops on issues related to agriculture and other future topics that may arise from this work) by 22 October 2018 |
	| SBSTA/SBI 49 December 2018 | Workshop with constituted bodies under the Conventionb on topic 2(a) (Modalities for implementation of the outcomes of the five in-session workshops on issues related to agriculture and other future topics that may arise from this work) |
	|  | Intersessional 
activities | Preparation of workshop report by the secretariat on topic 2(a) (Modalities for implementation of the outcomes of the five in-session workshops on issues related to agriculture and other future topics that may arise from this work) Submissions on topics 2(b) (Methods and approaches for assessing adaptation, adaptation co-benefits and resilience) and 2(c) (Improved soil carbon, soil health and soil fertility under grassland and cropland as well as integrated systems, including water management) by 6 May 2019 |
	| SBSTA/SBI 50 
June 2019 | Workshops on topics 2(b) (Methods and approaches for assessing adaptation, adaptation co-benefits and resilience) and 2(c) (Improved soil carbon, soil health and soil fertility under grassland and cropland as well as integrated systems, including water management) |
	|  | Consideration of the workshop report on topic 2(a) (Modalities for implementation of the outcomes of the five in-session workshops on issues related to agriculture and other future topics that may arise from this work) |
	|  | Intersessional 
activities | Preparation of workshop reports by the secretariat on topics 2(b) (Methods and approaches for assessing adaptation, adaptation co-benefits and resilience) and 2(c) (Improved soil carbon, soil health and soil fertility under grassland and cropland as well as integrated systems, including water management) Submissions on topic 2(d) (Improved nutrient use and manure management towards sustainable and resilient agricultural systems) by 30 September 2019 |
	| SBSTA/SBI 51
November 2019 | Workshop on topic 2(d) (Improved nutrient use and manure management towards sustainable and resilient agricultural systems) Consideration of the workshop reports on topics 2(b) (Methods and approaches for assessing adaptation, adaptation co-benefits and resilience) and 2(c) (Improved soil carbon, soil health and soil fertility under grassland and cropland as well as integrated systems, including water management) |
	|  | Intersessional 
activities | Preparation of workshop report by the secretariat on topic 2(d) (Improved nutrient use and manure management towards sustainable and resilient agricultural systems)  Submissions on topics 2(e) (Improved livestock management systems, including agropastoral production systems and others) and 2(f) (Socioeconomic and food security dimensions of climate change in the agricultural sector) by 20 April 2020 |
	| SBSTA/SBI 52
June 2020 | Workshops on topics 2(e) (Improved livestock management systems, including agropastoral production systems and others) and 2(f) (Socioeconomic and food security dimensions of climate change in the agricultural sector) Consideration of the workshop report on topic 2(d) (Improved nutrient use and manure management towards sustainable and resilient agricultural systems) |
	|  | Intersessional 
activities | Preparation of workshop reports by the secretariat on topics 2(e) (Improved livestock management systems, including agropastoral production systems and others) and 2(f) (Socioeconomic and food security dimensions of climate change in the agricultural sector) Submissions on future topics not listed in decision 4/CP.23 and views on the progress of the Koronivia joint work on agriculture in order to report to the Conference of the Parties as per decision 4/CP.23, paragraph 4, by 28 September 2020 |
	| SBSTA/SBI 53
November 2020 | Consideration of the workshop reports on topics 2(e) (Improved livestock management systems, including agropastoral production systems and others) and 2(f) (Socioeconomic and food security dimensions of climate change in the agricultural sector) Report to the Conference of the Parties on the progress and outcomes of the work, including on potential future topics |
	| Abbreviations: SBI = Subsidiary Body for Implementation, SBSTA = Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice. 	a  Topic numbering refers to the paragraphs in decision 4/CP.23. 	b  Constituted bodi0es will contribute to the Koronivia joint work on agriculture in accordance with decision 4/CP.23, paragraph 1. |
	
	
	
	
Annex II
	Scope of the review of the work of the improved forum
		I.	Guiding questions on the work programme of the improved forum
			1.	How has the forum’s work programme in the areas of economic diversification and transformation and just transition of the workforce, and the creation of decent work and quality jobs supported the functions and objectives of the forum as outlined in decision 11/CP.21?
			2.	To what extent has the work programme been effective in providing a platform allowing Parties to share, in an interactive manner, information, experiences, case studies, best practices and views, and to facilitate assessment and analysis of the impact of the implementation of response measures, on the positive and negative impacts and on ways to maximize the positive and minimize the negative impacts, with a view to recommending specific actions?
			3.	To what extent has the work programme been effective in focusing the work under the improved forum on providing concrete examples, case studies and practices in order to enhance the capacity of Parties, in particular developing country Parties, to deal with the impact of implementing response measures?
			4.	To what extent has the work programme been effective in addressing the needs of all Parties, in particular developing country Parties, informed by, inter alia, the assessment and analysis of impacts, including the use and development of economic modelling, taking into account all relevant policy issues of concern?
			5.	To what extent has the implementation of the forum’s work programme facilitated the provision of recommendations to the subsidiary bodies on specific actions for their consideration, with a view to recommending those actions, as appropriate, to the Conference of Parties, beginning at its twenty-third session?
		II.	Guiding questions on the modalities of operation of the improved forum
			6.	How effective have the forum’s modalities been in supporting the forum’s functions and work programme?
				(a)	Technical papers;
				(b)	Submissions from Parties and organizations;
				(c)	Interactions with external experts and relevant institutions and organizations;
				(d)	Workshops;
				(e)	The ad hoc technical expert group;
				(f)	In-forum discussions as contact group;
				(g)	Review of the work of the improved forum every three years.
			
				
				
				
				
				
