|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBSTA/2017/7 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 31 January 2018  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its forty-seventh session,
held in Bonn from 6 to 15 November 2017
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session
		(Agenda item 1)		1–2	3
		II.	Organizational matters 
		(Agenda item 2)		3–10	3
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		3–6	3
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		7–8	5
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair		9–10	5
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to 
		climate change 
		(Agenda item 3)		11–27	5
		IV.	Report of the Adaptation Committee
		(Agenda item 4)		28–32	8
		V.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for 
		Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
		(Agenda item 5)		33–34	9
		VI.	Development and transfer of technologies 
		(Agenda item 6)		35–42	9
		A.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the 
			Climate Technology Centre and Network		35	9
		B.	Technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the 
			Paris Agreement		36–42	9
		VII.	Issues relating to agriculture 
		(Agenda item 7)		43–46	10
		VIII.	Research and systematic observation 
		(Agenda item 8)		47–61	10
		IX.	Impact of the implementation of response measures 
		(Agenda item 9)		62–78	13
		A.	Improved forum and work programme		62–72	13
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement 
			of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures		73–77	14
			Paragraphs	Page
		C.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol		78	15
		X.	Methodological issues under the Convention 
		(Agenda item 10)		79–86	15
		A.	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of 
			greenhouse gases		79–83	15
		B.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport		84–86	16
		XI.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement
		(Agenda item 11)		87–104	16
		A.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, 
			of the Paris Agreement		87–92	16
		B.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, 
			paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreeent		93–98	17
		C.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to 
			in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement		99–104	17
		XII.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized 
		through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the 
		Paris Agreement 
		(Agenda item 12)		105–108	18
		XIII.	Local communities and indigenous peoples platform 
		(Agenda item 13)		109	18
		XIV.	Reports on other activities 
		(Agenda item 14)		110–112	19
		A.	Annual report on the technical review of information reported under the 
			Convention by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention in their 
			biennial reports and national communications		110	19
		B.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of 
			Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		111	19
		C.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and 
			other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in 
			Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol		112	19
		XV.	Other matters
		(Agenda item 15)		113	19
		XVI.	Closure of and report on the session 
		(Agenda item 16)		114–118	19
		
		
	I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)
		1.	The forty-seventh session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Bonn, Germany, from 6 to 15 November 2017.
		2.	The Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize), opened the session on Monday, 6 November, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Ms. Annela Anger-Kraavi (Estonia) as Vice-Chair of the SBSTA and Mr. Aderito Manuel Fernandes Santana (Sao Tome and Principe) as Rapporteur.
	II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
			3.	At its 1st meeting, on 6 November, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive 	Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBSTA/2017/5).
			4.	The agenda was adopted as follows:
			1.	Opening of the session.
			2.	Organizational matters:
				(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
				(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
				(c)	Election of officers other than the Chair.
			3.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate 				change.
			4.	Report of the Adaptation Committee.
				5.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.
			6.	Development and transfer of technologies:
				(a)	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network;
				(b)	Technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
			7.	Issues relating to agriculture.
			8.	Research and systematic observation.
			9.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
				(a)	Improved forum and work programme;
				(b)	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures;
				(c)	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol.
			10.	Methodological issues under the Convention:
				(a)	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases;
				(b)	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport.
			11.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement:
				(a)	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement;
				(b)	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement;
				(c)	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement.
				12.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement.
			13.	Local communities and indigenous peoples platform.
			14.	Reports on other activities:
				(a)	Annual report on the technical review of information reported under the Convention by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention in their biennial reports and national communications;
				(b)	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(c)	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol.
			15.	Other matters.
			16.	Closure of and report on the session.
				5.	The Chair reminded Parties of the issues referred to the SBSTA by the Conference of the Parties (COP) and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at their 1st meetings, which were to be considered by the SBSTA under its relevant existing agenda items.
				6.	In addition, the SBSTA agreed that statements would be made following the adoption of the agenda and the launch of work and that it would hold a plenary jointly with the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) to hear statements immediately after the conclusion of the 1st meeting of the SBSTA, on 6 November. Oral reports were given by representatives of constituted bodies, namely the Technology Executive Committee (TEC) and the Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN), and mandated statements were made by representatives of intergovernmental organizations, namely the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS) and the Coordination Group for Meteorological Satellites (CGMS), the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS), the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the World Climate Research Programme and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO).
		B.	Organization of the work of the session 
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			7.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. The Chair drew attention to the deadline for all groups to conclude their work by 6 p.m. on Monday, 13 November, to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary, which was to be convened in two parts. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to proceed on that basis and in line with previously adopted conclusions of the SBI on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
			8.	At its 2nd meeting, on 6 November, which was held jointly with the 2nd meeting of the SBI, the SBSTA heard statements from Parties and observers. Statements were made by representatives of 16 Parties, including on behalf of the Group of 77 and China (G77 and China), the Umbrella Group, the European Union (EU), the Environmental Integrity Group, the African Group, the Alliance of Small Island States, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty, the Coalition for Rainforest Nations, the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean, the least developed countries (LDCs) and the Like-minded Developing Countries. Statements were also made by representatives of women and gender non-governmental organizations (NGOs), youth NGOs, business and industry NGOs, environmental NGOs, farmers NGOs, indigenous peoples organizations, local government and municipal authorities, research and independent NGOs and trade union NGOs.
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			9.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at its 5th meeting, on 15 November. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled rule 27 of the draft rules of procedure being applie9d, whereby the SBSTA was expected to elect its Rapporteur. At the same meeting, the SBSTA noted that the consultations on the nominations were ongoing.
			10.	At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA was informed that no nomination had been received for Rapporteur and that the current Rapporteur would remain in office until his successor was elected.
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change
(Agenda item 3)
			1.	Proceedings
				11.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2017/INF.6 and the submissions related to the agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Julio Cordano (Chile) and Mr. Kunihiko Shimada (Japan). At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				12.	The SBSTA welcomed the report on progress made in implementing activities under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change (NWP), especially progress in relation to the following four issues: ecosystems, water resources, human settlements and health.
				13.	The SBSTA expressed its appreciation to Japan for providing financial support for the implementation of activities under the NWP.
				14.	The SBSTA also expressed its appreciation to the International Development Research Centre and the United Nations Human Settlements Programme for providing support for the participation of relevant experts, including experts from developing countries, in the 11th NWP Focal Point Forum.
				15.	The SBSTA welcomed the opportunities presented to the NWP to contribute to the work of other constituted bodies under the Convention, in particular the Adaptation Committee (AC) and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG), including:
					(a)	The preparation of an overview of the landscape of existing platforms providing technical support to developing country Parties on adaptation;
					(b)	The preparation of an information paper on considerations regarding vulnerable communities, groups and ecosystems in the context of the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans (NAPs).
				16.	The SBSTA noted that the opportunities referred to in paragraph 15 above have strengthened the role of the NWP in providing knowledge support to the work of the AC and the LEG through innovative partnership arrangements.
				17.	The SBSTA welcomed the recommendations of the AC and the LEG and requested that the activities referred to therein be undertaken under the NWP by the secretariat, with NWP partner organizations, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA.
				18.	The SBSTA acknowledged the submissions from Parties, NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations on their recent work in the areas of human settlements and adaptation, indicators of adaptation and resilience at the national and/or local level or for specific sectors, and adaptation actions and plans that could enhance economic diversification and produce mitigation co-benefits.
				19.	The SBSTA welcomed the outcomes of the 11th Focal Point Forum on human settlements and adaptation, which was held under the overall guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA in conjunction with SBSTA 47. The SBSTA also welcomed the technical dialogue with human settlements experts that was co-organized with NWP partner organizations prior to COP 23 to complement the Focal Point Forum in response to the mandate from SBSTA 46. The SBSTA noted that the 11th Focal Point Forum and the technical dialogue resulted in:
					(a)	Enhancing the engagement of experts and expert organizations, including those from developing countries;
					(b)	Providing an interactive space for information-sharing and the informal exchange of views among Parties, NWP partner organizations, experts and other relevant organizations;
					(c)	Facilitating collaboration and partnerships among NWP partner organizations, Parties and other relevant organizations.
				20.	The SBSTA also noted that the Focal Point Forum participants identified follow-up collaborative activities that could contribute to translating the key findings and gaps identified in the activities undertaken under the NWP into concrete adaptation actions. The SBSTA encouraged the secretariat to replicate the modalities referred to in paragraph 19 above to continue enhancing the effectiveness of the Focal Point Forum in the future.
				21.	The SBSTA welcomed the priority-setting workshops for six subregions under the Lima Adaptation Knowledge Initiative (LAKI). They were organized by the secretariat in partnership with the United Nations Environment Programme and other partner organizations as a joint action pledge under the NWP. The SBSTA also welcomed the significant efforts made under the pilot phase of LAKI and supported the enhancement of communication in the next phase of LAKI to further raise awareness.
				22.	The SBSTA encouraged Parties to enhance the engagement of their UNFCCC national focal points in NWP activities with a view to strengthening partnerships with NWP partner organizations.
					23.	The SBSTA requested Parties to consider the following areas in improving the relevance and effectiveness of the NWP:
						(a)	How to enhance the engagement of partner organizations with the aim of improving the linkages of their workplans to the themes addressed under the NWP;
						(b)	How to ensure that the NWP has delivered on its mandate, on the basis of Parties’ submissions and experience;
						(c)	How to enhance the role of the NWP to be more relevant to the work of the AC and the LEG as well as other constituted bodies and relevant workstreams in the light of the Paris Agreement.
					24.	The SBSTA agreed to extend the deadline for the submission of views on further improving the relevance and effectiveness of the NWP from 12 January 2018 to 30 March 2018. The SBSTA invited Parties, NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations to also submit their views on the areas referred to in paragraph 23 above. The SBSTA noted that those submissions will inform the review of the NWP at SBSTA 48 (April–May 2018).
				25.	The SBSTA also noted the potential role that webinars, webcasts and expert meetings on the margins of the NAP Expo could play in informing the submissions referred to in paragraph 24 above. The SBSTA invited the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, to consider this matter.
				26.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, to prepare a synthesis report summarizing the outcomes of the work undertaken under the NWP since SBSTA 44 to serve as input to the review of the NWP at SBSTA 48.
				27.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 20, 21 and 25 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	IV.	Report of the Adaptation Committee 
(Agenda item 4)
		1.	Proceedings
			28.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SB/2017/2 and FCCC/SB/2017/2/Add.1–FCCC/SBI/2017/14/Add.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this agenda item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 47 agenda item 12 and that it would convene informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Richard Merzian (Australia) and Mr. Hamza Tber (Morocco). The SBSTA also agreed that the group established under this agenda item would meet jointly with the group established under SBI 47 agenda item 10, “Matters relating to the least developed countries”, to consider the joint recommendations prepared by the LEG and the AC for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) at its first session in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 41 and 45. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			29.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the report of the AC.
			30.	The SBI and the SBSTA expressed their appreciation for the technical work undertaken by the AC. They noted that the AC has completed its work on the recommendations to the CMA in response to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 42, as well as its work, together with the LEG, on the recommendations to the CMA in response to decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 41 and 45.
			31.	The SBI and the SBSTA initiated their consideration of the recommendations referred to in paragraph 30 above, including through joint meetings with the group established under SBI agenda item 10 on the joint recommendations of the AC and the LEG for consideration and adoption by the CMA.
			32.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue their consideration of this matter at SBSTA 48 and SBI 48 (April–May 2018) with a view to making a recommendation to be forwarded by COP 24 for consideration and adoption at CMA 1.
	V.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts 
(Agenda item 5)
		33.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2017/1 and Add.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this agenda item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 47 agenda item 13 and that it would convene informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Beth Lavender (Canada) and Mr. Alf Wills (South Africa). At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts for consideration and adoption at COP 23.
		34.	At the same meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to recommend to the COP that the expert dialogue referred to in paragraph 9 of the above-mentioned draft decision be named the Suva expert dialogue and that the clearing house for risk transfer referred to in paragraph 2 of the same text, operationalized by the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism and launched during the session, be named the Fiji Clearing House for Risk Transfer.
	VI.	Development and transfer of technologies
(Agenda item 6)
		A.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network
(Agenda sub-item 6(a))
			35.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2017/3. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 47 agenda sub-item 14(a) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Balisi Gopolang (Botswana) and Ms. Elfriede More (Austria). At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on enhancing climate technology development and transfer through the Technology Mechanism for consideration and adoption at COP 23.
		B.	Technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 6(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				36.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2017/INF.5. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Stella Gama (Malawi) and Ms. More. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				37.	The SBSTA continued its deliberations on the elaboration of the technology framework established under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the technology framework).
				38.	The SBSTA welcomed the information provided by the TEC and the CTCN on activities relevant to the elaboration of the technology framework.
				39.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation that the TEC and the CTCN have already initiated activities relevant to and in support of the implementation of the Paris Agreement, including in connection with the key themes and their relation to the technology cycle.
				40.	The SBSTA also noted with appreciation the role of the TEC and the CTCN, and invited them to undertake additional activities to implement the Paris Agreement with overarching guidance provided by the technology framework.
				41.	The SBSTA welcomed the progress and the constructive discussions among Parties regarding the possible elements of the technology framework, while noting that deliberations on its roll-out are still ongoing.
				42.	The SBSTA requested its Chair to prepare an initial draft of the technology framework by 15 March 2018 taking into account the ongoing deliberations and progress made at SBSTA 45, 46 and this session, for consideration at SBSTA 48.
	VII.	Issues relating to agriculture
(Agenda item 7)
		1.	Proceedings
			43.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Emmanuel Dlamini (Swaziland) and Mr. Heikki Granholm (Finland). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			44.	The SBSTA, in accordance with decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 75, continued its work on issues relating to agriculture.
			45.	The SBSTA continued the exchange of views on issues relating to agriculture, taking into account the outcomes of the past five in-session workshops and Parties’ deliberations and progress made at SBSTA 46.
			46.	The SBSTA recommended a draft decision on issues relating to agriculture for consideration and adoption at COP 23.
		VIII.	Research and systematic observation
(Agenda item 8)
			1.	Proceedings
				47.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Fred Kossam (Malawi) and Mr. Stephan Roesner (Germany). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				48.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the statements delivered by representatives of the IPCC and WMO at the opening ceremony of COP 23.
				49.	The SBSTA also noted with appreciation the statements delivered at its 1st meeting by representatives of the EU on behalf of CEOS and CGMS, GCOS, the IPCC, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Climate Research Programme and WMO.
				50.	The SBSTA welcomed the summary report prepared by its Chair on the Earth Information Day held during COP 22.
				51.	The SBSTA also welcomed the following submissions:
					(a)	The outcomes of the sixty-ninth session of the WMO Executive Council with respect to scientific advice to the UNFCCC and implementation of the Paris Agreement;
					(b)	The WMO greenhouse gas bulletin on the state of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere based on global observations through 2016;
					(c)	The WMO statement on the state of the global climate in 2017;
					(d)	The report from the GCOS secretariat on progress made on the implementation of the GCOS implementation plan, The Global Observing System for Climate: Implementation Needs (hereinafter referred to as the GCOS IP);
					(e)	The comprehensive space agency response to the GCOS IP, and its executive summary, by the Joint CEOS/CGMS Working Group on Climate.
				52.	The SBSTA noted with concern the information reported in the submissions referred to in paragraph 51(b) and (c) above.
				53.	The SBSTA noted the efforts undertaken by GCOS and the wider science community on the development of climate indicators, including global surface temperature, global atmospheric carbon dioxide and glacier change, and by WMO on the categorization of extreme events. The SBSTA invited GCOS and WMO to report to it on progress, as appropriate, and noted the relevance of their work in the context of decision 4/CP.22, paragraph 4(c). It welcomed the inclusion of information in the statement by WMO referred to in paragraph 51(c) above on observed impacts, including economic, health and agricultural impacts.
				54.	The SBSTA noted the importance of ocean-related climate indicators, including ocean heat content, ocean acidification, sea level rise, and Arctic and Antarctic sea ice extent, for informing on the state of the global climate. It encouraged Parties to sustain observations underpinning these indicators. It also noted the Ocean Conference 2017 and the importance of systematic observations related to the oceans.
				55.	Recalling its conclusions from SBSTA 45, the SBSTA:
					(a)	Noted the joint GCOS/WMO Integrated Global Observing System workshop for Pacific small island developing States in Nadi, Fiji, from 9 to 12 October 2017 and the development of a Pacific region observing network plan;
					(b)	Also noted that GCOS plans to hold the next regional workshop in Africa in 2018;
					(c)	Encouraged Parties and relevant organizations to take advantage of support available via the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism as well as other relevant organizations and channels, as appropriate, to support the GCOS regional workshops and projects identified in the resulting implementation plans.
				56.	The SBSTA recognized the progress made by the satellite community (see para. 51(e) above), in close collaboration with GCOS, in the development of the essential climate variable inventory. It noted the usefulness of the essential climate variable inventory for climate services. It invited CEOS and CGMS to report on progress at future sessions of the SBSTA, as appropriate.
				57.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the information provided in the submission referred to in paragraph 51(a) above on the Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS). It invited WMO to report on progress in implementing the GFCS at future sessions of the SBSTA, as appropriate.
				58.	The SBSTA invited the UNFCCC secretariat to communicate with the WMO secretariat, including with regional centres, to inform work on climate services.
				59.	The SBSTA noted the increasing capability to systematically monitor greenhouse gas concentrations and emissions, through in situ as well as satellite observations, and its relevance in support of the Paris Agreement.
				60.	The SBSTA also noted the needs and the challenges of sustaining systematic observations, particularly in developing countries, including upper air observations. It encouraged Parties and relevant organizations to work towards sustaining such observations.
				61.	The SBSTA encouraged Parties and relevant organizations to enhance systematic observations related to the monitoring of GCOS essential climate variables and the understanding and prediction of extreme events and slow onset events.
	IX.	Impact of the implementation of response measures 
(Agenda item 9)
		A.	Improved forum and work programme
(Agenda sub-item 9(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				62.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2017/INF.2 and the submissions related to the agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 47 agenda sub-item 17(a) and that it would establish a contact group to convene the 5th meeting of the improved forum, co-chaired by the Chair of the SBSTA and the Chair of the SBI, Mr. Tomasz Chruszczow (Poland), assisted by Ms. Nataliya Kushko (Ukraine) and Mr. Andrei Marcu (Panama). At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				63.	The SBI and the SBSTA convened the 4th meeting of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				64.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note with appreciation of the detailed report, prepared by the co-chairs of the ad hoc technical expert group (TEG), on the discussions of the TEG at its meeting held in Bonn, Germany, on 9 and 10 May 2017.
				65.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the views expressed by Parties on the usefulness of the meetings of the TEG at the forty-sixth sessions of the subsidiary bodies and decided to review the design of the TEG during the review of the work of the forum at the sessions of the subsidiary bodies to be held in December 2018.
				66.	The SBI and the SBSTA also took note of the views expressed by Parties and observers contained in their submissions on aspects related to economic diversification and transformation and just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs, in the context of sustainable development, with a view to informing the in-forum discussion on possible needs for modelling tools, including capacity-building opportunities, that took place at the sessions and the in-forum training workshop on the use of economic modelling tools to take place at SBI 48 and SBSTA 48.
				67.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the exchange of views during the in-forum discussion on possible needs for modelling tools, including capacity-building opportunities, related to the work programme of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures, as well as on the areas of the work programme.
				68.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the discussions on the needs expressed by some Parties for capacity-building for the assessment of the impacts of response measures, and acknowledging and enhancing existing capacity-building opportunities, including through cooperation on response measures. The SBI and the SBSTA invited the secretariat to collaborate with relevant intergovernmental and international organizations to raise awareness with a view to enhancing capacity-building programmes or activities for Parties in order to maximize the positive and minimize the negative impacts of response measures, with a view to informing the in-session discussions.
				69.	The SBI and the SBSTA noted the views expressed by Parties on the in-forum training workshop scheduled for their forty-eighth sessions, including but not limited to improving the existing modelling portal, data availability, and implications for regions, sectors and gender issues. They requested the secretariat to organize, under the guidance of the Chairs of the SBI and the SBSTA, a two-day training workshop on the use of economic modelling tools related to the areas of the work programme of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures, which will include experts invited from both developing and developed countries, as well as from intergovernmental and international organizations. The SBI and the SBSTA also requested the secretariat to prepare a report on the workshop for consideration at the sessions of the SBI and the SBSTA to be held in December 2018.
				70.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties and observers to submit, by 30 March 2018, their views on the scope of the review of the work of the improved forum that will take place at the sessions of the SBI and the SBSTA to be held in December 2018, in line with the work programme, with a view to informing the in-forum discussion at their forty-eighth sessions.
				71.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the actions to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 68 and 69 above.
				72.	They requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures 
(Agenda sub-item 9(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				73.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 47 agenda sub-item 17(b) and that it would establish a contact group co-chaired by the Chairs of the SBSTA and the SBI, assisted by Ms. Kushko and Mr. Marcu. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				74.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the submissions from Parties and observers and welcomed the views contained therein on this agenda sub-item.
				75.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the exchange of views that took place during the pre-sessional workshop on 4 and 5 November 2017, which focused on elements of the modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				76.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered with appreciation the updated reflections note prepared by their Chairs with the assistance of the co-facilitators and the secretariat, and welcomed the discussion during the sessions on the modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures. The SBI and the SBSTA agreed that the recommendation being prepared under this agenda sub-item for consideration and adoption at CMA 1 will include language for the CMA to take the necessary procedural steps to enable the forum to serve the Paris Agreement as per decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 33 and 34.
				77.	To facilitate deliberations at SBI 48 and SBSTA 48, the SBI and the SBSTA requested their Chairs to prepare an informal document containing draft elements of the recommendation, for consideration and adoption at CMA 1, on the modalities, work programme and functions of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures to address the effects of the implementation of response measures under the Paris Agreement, on the basis of prior submissions from Parties under this agenda sub-item and the informal note prepared by the co-facilitators.
		C.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 9(c))
			78.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to the Chair’s proposal that substantive discussions under this sub-item be held in the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures jointly with those under agenda sub-item 9(a). At the 5th meeting, the Chair informed the SBSTA that no specific conclusions had been reached on the matter. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of the matter at SBSTA 48.
		X.	Methodological issues under the Convention 
(Agenda item 10)
			A.	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases
(Agenda sub-item 10(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					79.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Takeshi Enoki (Japan) and Mr. Stephen King’uyu (Kenya). At the 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					80.	The SBSTA continued its consideration of the common metrics used to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions by sources and removals by sinks (hereinafter referred to as common metrics) within the framework of methodological issues under the Convention and reiterated its acknowledgement of the relevance of common metrics to climate change policy.
					81.	The SBSTA noted that the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Paris Agreement (APA) has initiated its work on common metrics in relation to the elaboration of guidance for accounting for Parties’ nationally determined contributions for consideration and adoption by the CMA, which, inter alia, ensures that Parties account for anthropogenic emissions and removals in accordance with methodologies and common metrics assessed by the IPCC and adopted by the CMA.
					82.	The SBSTA held substantive discussions on this matter, including on the findings of the IPCC in its Fifth Assessment Report, and recognized that further consideration of common metrics by the APA is necessary.
					83.	The SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of common metrics at its session to be held in June 2019 so as to be able to take into account the deliberations under the APA on the guidance referred to in paragraph 81 above and the findings of the IPCC in its Fifth Assessment Report.
				B.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport
(Agenda sub-item 10(b))
					1.	Proceedings
						84.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it a submission related to the agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that its Chair would consult with interested Parties on the matter and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
					2.	Conclusions
						85.	The SBSTA took note of the information received from and results reported by the secretariats of ICAO and IMO, and noted the views thereon expressed by Parties under SBSTA 47 agenda item 10, “Methodological issues under the Convention”, sub-item (b) “Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport”.
						86.	The SBSTA invited the secretariats of ICAO and IMO to continue to report, at future sessions of the SBSTA, on their ongoing work on relevant issues.
	XI.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 11)
		A.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 11(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				87.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Kelley Kizzier (EU) and Mr. Hugh Sealy (Maldives). At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				88.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 36, continued to elaborate the guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement.
				89.	The SBSTA took note of the submissions from Parties provided in response to the call for submissions set out in document FCCC/SBSTA/2017/4, paragraph 105.
				90.	The SBSTA also took note of the third iteration of the informal note prepared by the co-chairs.
				91.	To facilitate the deliberations at SBSTA 48, the SBSTA requested the SBSTA Chair to prepare an informal document containing the draft elements of guidance on cooperative approaches based on prior submissions by Parties under this agenda sub-item and the third iteration of the informal note prepared by the co-chairs.
				92.	The SBSTA agreed to continue the work on this matter at SBSTA 48.
		B.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda sub-item 11(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				93.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Kizzier and Mr. Sealy. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				94.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 38, continued to elaborate the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
				95.	The SBSTA took note of the submissions from Parties provided in response to the call for submissions set out in document FCCC/SBSTA/2017/4, paragraph 114.
				96.	The SBSTA also took note of the third iteration of the informal note prepared by the co-chairs.
				97.	To facilitate the deliberations at SBSTA 48, the SBSTA requested the SBSTA Chair to prepare an informal document containing the draft elements of the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism based on prior submissions by Parties under this agenda sub-item and the third iteration of the informal note prepared by the co‑chairs.
				98.	The SBSTA agreed to continue the work on this matter at SBSTA 48.
		C.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 11(c))
			1.	Proceedings
				99.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Kizzier and Mr. Sealy. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				100.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 40, continued to elaborate the draft decision on the work programme under the framework for non-market-based approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement.
				101.	The SBSTA took note of the submissions from Parties provided in response to the call for submissions set out in document FCCC/SBSTA/2017/4, paragraph 123.
				102.	The SBSTA also took note of the third iteration of the informal note prepared by the co-chairs.
				103.	To facilitate the deliberations at SBSTA 48, the SBSTA requested the SBSTA Chair to prepare an informal document containing the draft elements of the draft decision on the work programme based on prior submissions by Parties under this agenda sub-item and the third iteration of the informal note prepared by the co-chairs.
				104.	The SBSTA agreed to continue the work on this matter at SBSTA 48.
	XII.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 12)
		1.	Proceedings
			105.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda item in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Outi Honkatukia (Finland) and Mr. Andres Eduardo Mogro Zambrano (Ecuador). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			106.	The SBSTA welcomed the progress made in the work on the modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement as reflected in the informal note by the co-chairs of the contact group on this agenda item.
			107.	The SBSTA requested its Chair to continue consultations with the Co-Chairs of the APA with a view to ensuring coherence and coordination and the timely incorporation of the modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions developed by the SBSTA into the modalities, procedures and guidelines for the transparency framework referred to in Article 13 of the Paris Agreement, to be developed by the APA.
			108.	The SBSTA agreed to advance, and aims to complete, its work on this matter as soon as possible, taking into account the considerations referred to in paragraphs 106 and 107 above and the informal note referred to in paragraph 106 above and building on the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Finance on the 2016 biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows.
	XIII.	Local communities and indigenous peoples platform
(Agenda item 13)
		109.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 5th meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2017/6. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Shimada and Mr. Spencer Thomas (Grenada). At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on the local communities and indigenous peoples platform for consideration and adoption at COP 23. Statements were made by six Parties, including on behalf of the G77 and China, the EU, the Umbrella Group and the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean. A statement was also made by a representative of indigenous peoples organizations.
	XIV.	Reports on other activities
(Agenda item 14)
		A.	Annual report on the technical review of information reported under the Convention by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention in their biennial reports and national communications
(Agenda sub-item 14(a))
			110.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2017/INF.4.
		B.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 14(b))
			111.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2017/INF.8.
		C.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 14(c))
			112.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2017/INF.7.
	XV.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 15)
		113.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. No matters were raised under this agenda item.
		XVI.	Closure of and report on the session 
(Agenda item 16)
			1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
				114.	At the 5th meeting of the SBSTA, a representative of the secretariat provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during the session in accordance with the provisions of rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
				115.	He informed the SBSTA that certain activities mandated at the session called for support by the secretariat and required additional resources over and above the approved core budget for the biennium 2018–2019: under agenda item 3, “Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change”, funding in the amount of EUR 120,000 will be required; and under agenda item 13, “Local communities and indigenous peoples platform”, funding in the amount of EUR 45,000 will be required. He noted that these amounts were preliminary and based on the information available at that time. He also noted that the other additional requirements resulting from the session would be absorbed with existing resources.
				116.	He expressed the hope that the secretariat could count on the continued generosity of Parties and the provision of the additional funding needed in a timely and predictable manner. He also noted that without such funding the secretariat would not be in a position to provide the requested support.
			2.	Closure of and report on the session
				117.	At its 4th meeting, on 14 November, which was held jointly with the 4th meeting of the SBI, the SBSTA heard statements from Parties and observers. Statements were made by representatives of six Parties, including on behalf of the Umbrella Group, the EU, the Alliance of Small Island States and the LDCs. Statements were also made by representatives of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, women and gender NGOs, youth NGOs, business and industry NGOs, environmental NGOs, farmers NGOs, local government and municipal authorities, and research and independent NGOs.,
				118.	At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session and to make it available to all Parties. At the same meeting, the Chair thanked Parties, facilitators and the secretariat for their support and closed the session.
				
				
				
