|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBSTA/2023/4 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 2 August 2023  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its fifty-eighth session, 
held in Bonn from 5 to 15 June 2023
	Contents
		Page
		Abbreviations and acronyms		3
		I.	Opening of the session
(Agenda item 1)		4
		II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)		4
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		4
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		6
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair		6
		D.	Mandated events		7
			III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change
(Agenda item 3)		7
			IV.	Review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee
(Agenda item 4)		9
			V.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to 
in decision 7/CMA.3
(Agenda item 5)		9
			VI.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for
Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 6)		10
			VII.	Research and systematic observation
(Agenda item 7)		11
			VIII.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 8)		12
			IX.	Work programme on just transition pathways referred to in the relevant paragraphs of 
decision 1/CMA.4
(Agenda item 9)		13
			X.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security	
(Agenda item 10)		14
			XI.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures 
serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 11)		15
			XII.	Methodological issues under the Convention
(Agenda item 12)		15
		A.	Greenhouse gas data interface		15
		B.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport		15
			XIII.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the 
Paris Agreement and in decision 2/CMA.3
(Agenda item 13)		16
			XIV.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, 
of the Pari	s Agreement and referred to in decision 3/CMA.3
(Agenda item 14)		19
			XV.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, 
paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 4/CMA.3
(Agenda item 15)		20
			XVI.	Cooperation with other international organizations
(Agenda item 16)		22
			XVII.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in 
Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 17)		23
			XVIII.	Other matters
(Agenda item 18)		23
			XIX.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 19)		23
	Addendum – FCCC/SBSTA/2023/4/Add.1
	Draft decisions forwarded for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement
Abbreviations and acronyms
	| AR | Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change |
	| CMA | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement |
	| COP | Conference of the Parties |
	| IPCC | Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change |
	| LDC | least developed country |
	| NAP | national adaptation plan |
	| NGO | non-governmental organization |
	| NWP | Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change |
	| SB | sessions of the subsidiary bodies |
	| SBI | Subsidiary Body for Implementation |
	| SBSTA | Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice |
	| WMO | World Meteorological Organization |
	
	
	I.	Opening of the session
(Agenda item 1)
		1.	SBSTA 58 was held at the World Conference Center Bonn in Bonn, Germany, from 5 to 15 June 2023.
		2.	The SBSTA Chair, Harry Vreuls (Kingdom of the Netherlands), opened the session on Monday, 5 June, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Kakhaberi Mdivani (Georgia) as Vice-Chair and Zita Kassa Wilks (Gabon) as Rapporteur.
		3.	The Chair, also on behalf of the SBI Chair, recalled the recent passing of Muhammed Quamrul Islam Chowdhury from Bangladesh, a former delegate who was extensively involved in the UNFCCC process for many years, particularly in relation to adaptation. In his memory, the SBSTA Chair invited all delegates to observe a minute’s silence.
	II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
			4.	At its 1st meeting, on 5 June, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations.
			5.	The Chair explained that, after extensive consultations with Parties on the provisional agenda, more time was needed to consider the matter. He proposed that the SBSTA proceed with its work on the basis of the provisional agenda with a view to adopting the agenda at a meeting later in the session. He also proposed to hold consultations jointly with the SBI Chair on the way forward.
			6.	At the same meeting, statements were made by representatives of 29 Parties, including 14 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – People’s Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; Coalition for Rainforest Nations; Environmental Integrity Group; European Union and its member States; Group of 77 and China; Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; LDCs; Like-minded Developing Countries; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of five intergovernmental organizations: Global Climate Observing System, International Maritime Organization, IPCC, WMO and World Climate Research Programme, and by representatives of eight UNFCCC constituencies: business and industry NGOs; children and youth NGOs; environmental NGOs; Indigenous Peoples organizations; local government and municipal authorities; research and independent NGOs; trade union NGOs; and women and gender constituency.
			7.	At the 2nd meeting, on 12 June, when the provisional agenda was proposed for adoption, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, on behalf of the Like-minded Developing Countries, requested, in accordance with rule 13 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, to include in the agenda an item entitled “Urgently scaling up financial support from developed country Parties in line with Article 4, paragraph 5, to enable implementation for developing countries in this critical decade”. Since some Parties objected to this, the Chair informed Parties that he would continue consultations on the way forward with a view to then swiftly adopting the agenda, and adjourned the meeting.
			8.	At the 3rd meeting, on 14 June, the Chair reported on the consultations, which had resulted in Parties reaching agreement on the adoption of the agenda. The Chair proposed that the SBSTA adopt the provisional agenda with the title of item 9 orally amended and with the exception of item 18, with the understanding that the discussions during the informal consultations at this session on the Sharm el-Sheikh mitigation ambition and implementation work programme would be reflected in an informal note jointly prepared by the SBSTA and SBI Chairs under their own authority.
			9.	As proposed by the Chair, the SBSTA adopted the agenda as follows:
				1.	Opening of the session.
				2.	Organizational matters:
					(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
					(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
					(c)	Election of officers other than the Chair;
					(d)	Mandated events.
				3.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change.
				4.	Review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee.*
				5.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3.*
				6.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.*
				7.	Research and systematic observation.
				8.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement.*
				9.	Work programme on just transition pathways referred to in the relevant paragraphs of decision 1/CMA.4.*
				10.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security.*
				11.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement.*
				12.	Methodological issues under the Convention:
					(a)	Greenhouse gas data interface;
					(b)	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport.
				13.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 2/CMA.3.
				14.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement and referred to in decision 3/CMA.3.
				15.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 4/CMA.3.
				16.	Cooperation with other international organizations.
				17.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention.
				18.	Other matters.
				19.	Closure of and report on the session.
		B.	Organization of the work of the session
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			10.	At the 1st meeting of the SBSTA, which was held together with the 1st meeting of SBI 58, pending the adoption of the agenda and noting the strong will of Parties to make progress on all issues, the Chair proposed, and Parties agreed, to launch work on the basis of the provisional agenda (see para. ‎5 above).
			11.	The Chair encouraged Parties to engage constructively in the negotiations and respect meeting times and reminded them about the deadline for all groups to conclude their work by 6 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 June, to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary on Thursday, 15 June. He encouraged Parties to keep all informal consultations open to observers in accordance with established practice and relevant SBI conclusions.
			12.	On the proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to proceed on that basis and in line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
			13.	During these sessions, the SBSTA and SBI Chairs convened an informal stocktaking plenary, on 13 June, with the aim of facilitating openness, inclusiveness and transparency, to review the progress of the negotiations.
			14.	At the 4th meeting of the SBSTA, on 15 June, which was held together with the 4th meeting of SBI 58, statements were made by representatives of 25 Parties, including 14 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; Coalition for Rainforest Nations; Environmental Integrity Group; European Union and its member States; Group of 77 and China; Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; LDCs; Like-minded Developing Countries; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of eight UNFCCC constituencies: business and industry NGOs; children and youth NGOs; environmental NGOs; Indigenous Peoples organizations; local government and municipal authorities; research and independent NGOs; trade union NGOs; and women and gender constituency.
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			15.	At the 3rd meeting, the Chair recalled that the SBSTA was expected to elect its Vice-Chair and Rapporteur for 2023. He informed Parties that Zita Kassa Wilks had been nominated to serve as SBSTA Rapporteur for a second term. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA elected Zita Kassa Wilks as its Rapporteur for 2023. The Chair reminded Parties that consultations on nominations for SBSTA Vice-Chair were ongoing and he proposed to return to this sub-item at the SBSTA closing plenary.
			16.	At the 4th meeting, the Chair informed Parties that Nathalie Flores González (Dominican Republic) had been nominated for election as SBSTA Vice-Chair. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA elected Nathalie Flores González as its Vice-Chair for 2023, and the Chair congratulated her on her election. The Chair thanked Khakaberi Mdivani for his service as SBSTA Vice-Chair over the past three and a half years, including for his support throughout this session.
		D.	Mandated events
(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
			17.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA took note of the information provided by its Chair on the mandated events being held in conjunction with this session. At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA took note of the technical report on the in-session technical workshop on findings on emission metrics contained in the AR6, mandated at SBSTA 57.
	III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change
(Agenda item 3)
		1.	Proceedings
			18.	The document considered at this session is available on the UNFCCC website. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by María del Pilar Bueno (Argentina) and Maria Samuelsen (Denmark). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			19.	The SBSTA recognized the role of the NWP in closing knowledge gaps and engaging with experts in order to facilitate the co-production of knowledge-based outputs and the scaling up of action related to adaptation, in particular in developing countries, including the LDCs and small island developing States.
			20.	The SBSTA also recognized that the work under the NWP, in line with the knowledge-to-action methodology, is crucial to facilitating achievement of the goals of the Convention and the Paris Agreement in terms of supporting the delivery and enhancement of adaptation knowledge and action, in particular in developing countries, including the LDCs and small island developing States.
			21.	The SBSTA welcomed the report on progress in implementing activities under the NWP, prepared by the secretariat under the guidance of the SBSTA Chair, and the information provided therein on next steps, new activities and the workplan for 2023.
			22.	The SBSTA noted that the work under the NWP should include addressing knowledge gaps identified by Parties in developing adaptation-related policies and processes, and preparing and implementing actions identified in relevant documents, including NAPs, nationally determined contributions, adaptation communications, national communications and biennial transparency reports, as appropriate.
			23.	The SBSTA welcomed the work and progress of the secretariat in implementing activities under the NWP in 2022–2023. It requested the secretariat to continue to implement activities under the NWP, in particular in developing countries, including the LDCs and small island developing States, in line with the workplan referred to in paragraph ‎21 above.
			24.	The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to:
				(a)	Scale up the Lima Adaptation Knowledge Initiative around the globe, striving for a regional balance when organizing activities and workshops with regional partners thereunder, with a view to addressing knowledge gaps and enhancing adaptation action in developing countries;
				(b)	Strengthen the UN Climate Change and Universities Partnership Programme and continue to build partnerships, striving for a regional balance, for addressing adaptation knowledge gaps, particularly in developing countries;
				(c)	Enhance, in collaboration with NWP partners, the provision of usable, useful and innovative knowledge on specific adaptation practices, including cross-cutting practices, in order to respond to Parties’ needs, including those identified in the current and future work of relevant constituted bodies under the Convention and the Paris Agreement;
				(d)	Continue to enhance understanding of and disseminate scientific knowledge and, in collaboration with the Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform, enhance understanding and application of local knowledge and Indigenous science, values and knowledge systems with a view to addressing current and future knowledge gaps, and enhance the availability of and access to related knowledge products, translating them into United Nations official languages, as appropriate;
				(e)	Strengthen modalities for disseminating and communicating NWP knowledge products, including at regional climate weeks and NAP Expos, by updating and enhancing the user-friendliness and accessibility of the adaptation knowledge portal, and by increasing the provision of knowledge products in different United Nations official languages, as appropriate;
				(f)	Continue its work with the secretariats of the other Rio Conventions with regard to adaptation-related issues;
				(g)	Prepare a concise report on activities, by region, undertaken under the NWP in the last five years for consideration at SBSTA 60 (June 2024), with the aim of closing knowledge gaps that may affect future activities, increasing cooperation and creating synergies at the interregional level, and facilitating the scaling up of adaptation action;
				(h)	Organize an event on monitoring, evaluation and learning systems for all adaptation actions and support, including transformational adaptation;
				(i)	Organize the 16th Focal Point Forum, in conjunction with COP 28 (November–December 2023), on addressing adaptation knowledge gaps in mountains, high-latitude areas and the cryosphere.
			25.	The SBSTA recognized the importance of the NWP in relation to brokering and delivering knowledge and expertise to constituted bodies and for processes of relevance under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, as well as the ability to actively respond under the NWP to the adaptation knowledge gaps identified within those bodies and processes.
			26.	The SBSTA invited Parties, NWP partners and other relevant organizations, as appropriate, to provide financial and in-kind support for the implementation of activities, striving for a regional balance, under the NWP.
			27.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph ‎24 above.
			28.	It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	IV.	Review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee*
(Agenda item 4)
		29.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 58 agenda item 12 in informal consultations co-facilitated by María del Pilar Bueno and Morgane Chiocchia (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
		30.	The SBSTA and the SBI continued consideration of this matter. At their 4th meeting, they agreed to continue consideration thereof at SB 59 (November–December 2023) on the basis of the draft text elements prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda item at these sessions, as amended by Parties and groups of Parties at the sessions.
	V.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3*
(Agenda item 5)
		1.	Proceedings
			31.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 58 agenda item 11 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Janine Elizabeth Felson (Belize) and Mattias Frumerie (Sweden). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			32.	The SBSTA and the SBI welcomed the progress in the implementation of the Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation and the fifth and sixth workshops held under the work programme in the first half of 2023.
			33.	The SBSTA and the SBI expressed appreciation to their Chairs for providing guidance on the workshops referred to in paragraph ‎32 above, to the secretariat for conducting the workshops and implementing interactive modalities for participation, and to Parties and non‑Party stakeholders for contributing to and engaging in the workshops.
			34.	The SBSTA and the SBI also expressed appreciation to the Governments of Maldives and Germany for hosting the fifth and sixth workshops respectively under the Glasgow–‍Sharm el-Sheikh work programme.
			35.	The SBSTA and the SBI reiterated that the development of the framework for guiding the achievement of the global goal on adaptation and the review of overall progress in achieving it is to be undertaken through a structured approach and may take into consideration, inter alia, the elements referred to in paragraph 10 of decision 3/CMA.4.
			36.	The SBSTA and the SBI invited their Chairs to continue considering, at the remaining workshops under the Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme, matters related to the framework referred to in paragraph ‎35 above, inter alia, the development and use of targets, indicators and metrics, global adaptation priorities, and modalities for increasing international cooperation in support of the framework, and to include in the workshops sessions for Parties to explore areas of commonality in developing the framework and taking stock of progress.
			37.	The SBSTA and the SBI took note of the views presented by Parties during these sessions, which can be considered during the remainder of the work programme and in the development of the framework referred to in paragraph ‎35 above, including to serve as input to discussions during the seventh and eighth workshops, recognizing that these views do not capture all those of Parties and do not represent consensus.
			38.	The SBSTA and the SBI considered the possible structural elements, outlined below, for a draft decision for consideration and adoption at CMA 5 (November–December 2023):
				(a)	Preamble;
				(b)	Acknowledgement of progress and conclusions under the Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation;
				(c)	Establishment of the framework for the global goal on adaptation;
				(d)	Elements of the framework for the global goal on adaptation:
					(i)	Purpose;
					(ii)	Dimensions;
					(iii)	Themes;
					(iv)	General and cross-cutting considerations;
					(v)	Enabling conditions (option 1) or means of implementation (option 2);
					(vi)	Reporting;
				(e)	Overarching targets and specific targets, indicators and metrics (option 1) or shared adaptation priorities under the framework for the global goal on adaptation (option 2);
				(f)	Link to the global stocktake;
				(g)	International cooperation and the role of stakeholders;
				(h)	Follow-up work (option 1) or no section on follow-up work (option 2);
				(i)	Finance and budgetary provisions (option 1) or no section on finance and budgetary provisions (option 2).
			39.	The SBSTA and the SBI recalled paragraph 18 of decision 3/CMA.4, inviting Parties and observers to submit views on the outcomes of and work conducted under the Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme, and further invited Parties to provide additional views on the draft decision for consideration and adoption at CMA 5 considering the possible structural elements set out in paragraph ‎38 above.
	VI.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts*
(Agenda item 6)
		40.	The document considered at this session is available on the UNFCCC website. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 58 agenda item 14 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Lucas Di Pietro Paolo (Argentina) and Cornelia Jäger (Austria).
		41.	The SBSTA and the SBI initiated discussions on selecting the host of the secretariat of the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change and, at their 4th meeting, agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SB 59 taking into account the draft text prepared for this agenda item at this session.
	VII.	Research and systematic observation
(Agenda item 7)
		1.	Proceedings
			42.	The SBSTA had before it relevant submissions. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Elizabeth Bush (Canada) and Ladislaus Chang’a (United Republic of Tanzania). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			43.	The SBSTA noted the importance of discussion under this agenda item on scientific advances and on research gaps and needs relevant to supporting work under the Convention and the Paris Agreement.
			44.	The SBSTA welcomed the activities and information reported in the statements delivered at the opening plenary of this session by the Global Climate Observing System, the IPCC, WMO and the World Climate Research Programme.
			45.	The SBSTA invited WMO to report on the outcomes of the nineteenth World Meteorological Congress, held from 22 May to 2 June 2023, at SBSTA 59 (November–‍December 2023).
			46.	The SBSTA welcomed the Synthesis Report of the AR6. It expressed its appreciation and gratitude to the authors and the entire IPCC community for their work on the Synthesis Report. It noted that the AR6 is an important contribution to the best available science for supporting decision-making on climate change.
			47.	The SBSTA expressed its appreciation to its Chair, the Chair and secretariat of the IPCC and the UNFCCC secretariat for organizing the SBSTA–IPCC special event on key findings from the Synthesis Report of the AR6, held on 5 June 2023.
			48.	Reflecting on the special event, the SBSTA noted the significant advances in scientific understanding of climate change since the AR5. Risks are increasing with every increment of global warming and, for any given future warming level, many climate-related risks are higher than assessed in the AR5.
			49.	The SBSTA expressed its appreciation to its Chair and the secretariat for organizing the fifteenth meeting of the research dialogue, held on 8 June 2023, on transformational adaptation, non-carbon dioxide greenhouse gases and carbon dioxide removal, including negative-emission technologies.
			50.	Reflecting on the event and meeting referred to in paragraphs 47 and 49 above respectively, the SBSTA noted scientific advances, knowledge gaps and research needs related to scenario development and use; high-resolution regional information; complex, cascading and transboundary risks; risks and opportunities related to upscaling carbon dioxide removal; the implications of different emission metric choices to climate change policies; enabling environments, including technologies and support; synergies and trade‑offs between mitigation, adaptation and the Sustainable Development Goals; and the consideration of equity.
			51.	The SBSTA encouraged Parties, research programmes and organizations, and the scientific community to take action to address the gaps and needs referred to in paragraph ‎50 above, including by strengthening regional research capacity and research inclusivity. It also encouraged the IPCC to continue its efforts to enhance inclusivity and regional representation in its seventh assessment cycle.
			52.	The SBSTA invited its Chair to prepare, with the assistance of the secretariat, a summary report on the meeting referred to in paragraph ‎49 above, to be made available in advance of SBSTA 59.
			53.	The SBSTA expressed its appreciation and gratitude to IPCC experts and other experts for their contributions to the event and meeting referred to in paragraphs ‎47 and ‎49 above respectively and for their contributions to mandated and other events related to the AR6 held during this session.
			54.	The SBSTA invited Parties and relevant organizations to submit via the submission portal by 15 March 2024 views on possible themes for the sixteenth meeting of the research dialogue, to be held in conjunction with SBSTA 60.
			55.	The SBSTA recommended draft decisions on the AR6 for consideration and adoption at COP 28 and CMA 5.
	VIII.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement*
(Agenda item 8)
		1.	Proceedings
			56.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 58 agenda item 7 in a joint contact group co-chaired by Alison Campbell (United Kingdom) and Joseph Teo (Singapore). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			57.	The SBSTA and the SBI emphasized the importance of the global stocktake for achieving the purpose and long-term goals of the Paris Agreement.
			58.	The SBSTA and the SBI expressed appreciation to the co-facilitators of the technical dialogue under the global stocktake for delivering the third and final meeting of the dialogue, and to facilitators, participating experts, Parties and non-Party stakeholders for their contributions to and engagement in that meeting.
			59.	The SBSTA and the SBI also expressed appreciation to the co-facilitators of the technical dialogue for preparing the summary report on the second meeting of the dialogue, the informal consultations on that report, held on 12 April 2023, and the informal consultations, held on 10 May 2023, on the information note on the third meeting of the dialogue.
			60.	The SBSTA and the SBI requested the co-facilitators of the technical dialogue to prepare the summary report on the third meeting of the technical dialogue by 15 August 2023 and the factual synthesis report by 8 September 2023.
			61.	The SBSTA and the SBI expressed appreciation to their Chairs for holding a consultation, in hybrid format, from 27 to 28 April 2023, on preparations for the consideration of outputs component of the first global stocktake and welcomed the rich discussions that took place. They noted the summary report on the consultation.
			62.	The SBSTA and the SBI also noted the update provided by the high-level committee referred to in paragraph 33 of decision 19/CMA.1, on 13 June 2023, on progress in planning its high-level events and encouraged the high-level committee to continue to engage Parties and non-Party stakeholders in its activities.
			63.	The SBSTA and the SBI took note of the views exchanged on the indicative draft structure of a draft decision on the global stocktake for consideration and adoption at CMA 5 and agreed to accelerate their work on the consideration of outputs component. They noted the indicative draft structure of the draft CMA 5 decision on the global stocktake contained in an informal note prepared by the co-chairs of the contact group for this agenda item at this session.
			64.	The SBSTA and the SBI thanked their Chairs for organizing an intersessional in‑person workshop, to be held in October 2023, to develop elements for the consideration of outputs component of the first global stocktake, which will inform the work of the joint contact group on the global stocktake. In addition, they:
				(a)	Invited Parties and non-Party stakeholders to submit views on the elements for the consideration of outputs component by 15 September 2023 via the submission portal taking into consideration the informal note referred to in paragraph ‎63 above;
				(b)	Requested the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies, to prepare a synthesis report on the submissions and to make it available on the UNFCCC website three weeks before the workshop.
			65.	The SBSTA and the SBI encouraged Parties and non-Party stakeholders to hold events, at the local, national, regional and international level, as appropriate, in support of the first global stocktake.
			66.	The SBSTA and the SBI reiterated their encouragement to Parties to make voluntary contributions for the timely implementation of activities included in these conclusions and under the first global stocktake.
	IX.	Work programme on just transition pathways referred to in the relevant paragraphs of decision 1/CMA.4*
(Agenda item 9)
		1.	Proceedings
			67.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 58 agenda item 8 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Marianne Karlsen (Norway) and Selam Kidane Abebe (Zambia). As Marianne Karlsen could not stay for the entire session, she was later replaced by Luisa Roelke (Germany). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			68.	The SBSTA and the SBI initiated consideration of the work programme on just transition pathways referred to in paragraph 52 of decision 1/CMA.4.
			69.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to continue work on this matter at SB 59, informed by the informal note available on the UNFCCC website, with a view to recommending a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption at CMA 5.
			70.	The SBSTA and the SBI invited Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal by 15 September 2023 views on different elements of the work programme referred to in paragraph ‎68 above and requested the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on Parties’ submissions with a view to informing Parties’ further discussions on the work programme during the workshop referred to in paragraph ‎71 below.
			71.	The SBSTA and the SBI also requested the secretariat to organize, under the guidance of their Chairs, a workshop to be held before SB 59 on the work programme referred to in paragraph ‎68 above to inform further work thereunder, based on the submissions and synthesis report referred to in paragraph ‎70 above, ensuring broad participation of Parties and observers. They further requested the secretariat to prepare, under the guidance of their Chairs, a summary report on the workshop.
			72.	The SBSTA and the SBI took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs ‎70–‎71 above.
			73.	They requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	X.	Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security*
(Agenda item 10)
		1.	Proceedings
			74.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 58 agenda item 10 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Lucia Perugini (Italy) and Milagros Sandoval (Peru). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			75.	The SBSTA and the SBI established at these sessions the Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security.
			76.	They welcomed the submissions from Parties and observers on the elements of that joint work, including views on topics for the workshops referred to in paragraph 15(b) of decision 3/CP.27.
			77.	They also welcomed the submissions from Parties and observers on the operationalization of the Sharm el-Sheikh online portal referred to in paragraph 16 of decision 3/CP.27.
			78.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SB 59.
	XI.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement*
(Agenda item 11)
		1.	Proceedings
			79.	The document considered at this session is available on the UNFCCC website. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 58 agenda item 9 in a joint contact group co-chaired by Catherine Goldberg (United States of America) and Peter Govindasamy (Singapore). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			80.	The SBSTA and the SBI convened at these sessions a meeting of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
			81.	The SBSTA and the SBI welcomed the forum’s in-session workshop on country-driven strategies for just transition and economic diversification focusing on challenges and opportunities and expressed their gratitude to the experts for their contributions to the workshop.
			82.	The SBSTA and the SBI:
				(a)	Continued their consideration of the midterm review of the workplan of the forum and its Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures;
				(b)	Deliberated on the views on and guiding questions for the review of the functions, work programme and modalities of the forum.
			83.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SB 59.
	XII.	Methodological issues under the Convention
(Agenda item 12)
		A.	Greenhouse gas data interface
(Agenda sub-item 12(a))
			84.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Thiago De Araújo Mendes (Brazil) and Daniela Romano (Italy). However, Parties could not conclude consideration of the matter at this session. In accordance with rules 10(c) and 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBSTA 59.
		B.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport
(Agenda sub-item 12(b))
			85.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Martin Cames (Germany) and Florence Pacifica Achieng (Kenya). However, Parties could not conclude consideration of the matter at this session. In accordance with rules 10(c) and 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the matter will be included in the provisional agenda for SBSTA 59.
	XIII.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 2/CMA.3
(Agenda item 13)
		1.	Proceedings
			86.	The documents considered at this session are available on the UNFCCC website. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Maria AlJishi (Saudi Arabia) and Peer Stiansen (Norway). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			87.	The SBSTA, pursuant to paragraphs 4, 16(a), 17 and 22 of decision 6/CMA.4, considered the guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, and in decision 2/CMA.3.
			88.	The SBSTA took note of:
				(a)	The submissions from Parties;
				(b)	The workshops held intersessionally:
					(i)	A hybrid workshop on potential challenges Parties participating in cooperative approaches may face in addressing different elements of the initial report and to support the identification of related capacity-building needs, held on 24 April 2023;
					(ii)	A hybrid workshop on the draft version of the agreed electronic format, held from 25 to 26 April 2023;
					(iii)	A virtual workshop, as part of the capacity-building programme referred to in paragraph 12 of decision 2/CMA.3, with the broad participation of Parties, on the completion and submission of the initial report, held from 17 to 18 May 2023.
			89.	The SBSTA also took note of:
				(a)	The technical paper, prepared by the secretariat on the basis of the issues identified at the workshop referred to in paragraph 88‎(b)(i) above, on potential considerations in the preparation of the reporting on elements listed in the initial report;
				(b)	The informal report on the workshop referred to in paragraph 88‎(b)‎(ii) above.
			90.	The SBSTA further took note of the informal note prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda item to capture the views expressed by Parties at this session on the matters referred to in paragraphs 4, 16(a), 17 and 22 of decision 6/CMA.4.
			91.	The SBSTA invited Parties and observer organizations to submit via the submission portal before SBSTA 59 views on the matters referred to in paragraphs 16(a), 17 and 22 of decision 6/CMA.4, to be taken into account where timing permits in preparing the technical paper and workshop referred to in paragraphs 92 and ‎93 below respectively, for consideration at SBSTA 59.
			92.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare, with a view to facilitating understanding of the relevant issues but without prejudging possible outcomes, and considering the relevant work undertaken in the first intersessional period of 2023 and relevant views expressed by Parties at this session, a technical paper without formal status on the elements referred to in paragraph 92‎(a–d) below prior to the workshop referred to in paragraph ‎93 below and on the elements and processes referred to in paragraph 92‎(e) below prior to publishing the informal document referred to in paragraph 94 below. The technical paper is to include analysis of the following elements, including any linkages between them, related to the mandates contained in decision 6/CMA.4 and to be prepared on the basis of any corresponding provisions of the guidance on cooperative approaches and relevant decisions of the CMA, and using flow charts and other visual representations:
				(a)	The process of authorization pursuant to paragraphs 2, 18(g) and 21(c) of the annex to decision 2/CMA.3, notably the scope of changes to authorization of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes towards use(s), and the process for managing them and for authorization of entities and cooperative approaches with a view to ensuring transparency and consistency;
				(b)	The draft version of the agreed electronic format, including concepts and options for the structure of the agreed electronic format and proposals for common nomenclatures for Parties to test and support capacity-building, as well as options for the tables for submitting annual information as part of the regular information, as referred to in paragraph 23(j) of the annex to decision 2/CMA.3;
				(c)	The mandates in paragraph 17(g–j) of decision 6/CMA.4, taking into account any submissions from Parties on the technical specifications and estimated costs for the international registry referred to in paragraph 33(c) of that decision;
				(d)	Analysis and sequencing of the steps in the Article 6, paragraph 2, reporting and review processes, including as referred to in paragraph 17(a) of decision 6/CMA.4;
				(e)	Elements and processes pertaining to inconsistencies identified in reviews and in data on internationally transferred mitigation outcomes in the Article 6 database as referred to in paragraphs 16(a)(iii) and 17(f) of decision 6/CMA.4.
			93.	The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to organize a hybrid workshop to be held in conjunction with the workshop being organized under the SBSTA agenda item entitled “Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement and referred to in decision 3/CMA.3” before SBSTA 59 to consider the technical paper on the elements referred to in paragraph 92‎(a–d) above.
			94.	To facilitate deliberations on further guidance on cooperative approaches, the SBSTA further requested its Chair to prepare an informal document, including textual proposals and a revised draft version of the agreed electronic format, informed by the relevant views expressed by Parties at this session, as captured in the informal note referred to in paragraph 90 above, and the intersessional work referred to in paragraphs 92–93 above, for consideration at SBSTA 59 with a view to it recommending a draft decision on further guidance on cooperative approaches for consideration and adoption at CMA 5.
			95.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat, in developing the manual referred to in paragraph 22 of decision 6/CMA.4, to consider including therein, as relevant, explanations of key terms and concepts, illustrative elements of information, templates, examples and case studies that are not country-specific, and questions and answers on elements of the guidance on cooperative approaches related to reporting requirements and the evolving reporting practice. It also requested the secretariat to regularly update the manual on the basis of ongoing work on and experience with the implementation of the guidance on cooperative approaches. The first version of the manual should be made available to Parties by the end of 2023, and regular updates are to be provided by the secretariat on the continued development of the manual.
			96.	The SBSTA acknowledged the importance of and urgent need for a strong capacity-building programme and requested the secretariat to continue to provide regular updates on the status of the work on the capacity-building programme referred to in paragraph 12 of decision 2/CMA.3. The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to prioritize as part of the capacity-building programme activities related to the preparation of the initial report, including fulfilment of the participation responsibilities set out in chapter II of the annex to decision 2/CMA.3 and the preparation of the agreed electronic format in its draft version.
			97.	The SBSTA recalled paragraph 9 of decision 6/CMA.4 regarding the request to the secretariat to implement and maintain the training programme for technical experts participating in Article 6 technical expert reviews pursuant to paragraph 26 of the annex to decision 2/CMA.3, taking into account technical advice from Article 6 lead reviewers on the implementation of the training for technical experts participating in Article 6 technical expert reviews pursuant to chapter XI.C of annex II to decision 6/CMA.4, and requested the secretariat to provide regular updates on the development of the training programme.
			98.	The SBSTA recalled paragraph 33(c) of decision 6/CMA.4 regarding the request to the secretariat to make available, as part of the implementation of the international registry, the technical specifications and associated cost estimates for the international registry and requested the secretariat to make available prior to SBSTA 59 updated specifications and estimates taking into account the submissions from Parties.
			99.	The SBSTA recalled paragraph 34 of decision 6/CMA.4 regarding the request to the secretariat to establish a voluntary forum of Article 6 registry system administrators and technical experts of participating Parties to facilitate cooperation among them, including sharing knowledge and experience in the context of implementing and operating the infrastructure under Article 6, paragraph 2, and to provide input to the further development and implementation of such infrastructure, as necessary, and requested the secretariat to expedite the implementation of that mandate.
			100.	The SBSTA recalled paragraph 38 of decision 6/CMA.4 regarding the request to the secretariat to prepare a technical paper on options for funding the activities related to the infrastructure under Article 6, paragraph 2, and the Article 6 technical expert review and requested the secretariat to prepare the paper as soon as possible but no later than one month prior to the workshop referred to in paragraph 93 above.
			101.	In relation to the technical paper referred to in paragraph 100 above, the SBSTA also requested the secretariat to conduct a survey of Parties on their choice between establishing a national registry or using the international registry, including the expected nature of such use, and on when they are planning to submit their initial report, as well as their capacity-building needs in this regard, in order to understand the potential volume of work and associated costs.
			102.	Regarding the matters referred to in paragraphs 16(a) and 17 of decision 6/CMA.4 that correspond to the matters referred to in paragraph 9 of decision 7/CMA.4, the SBSTA invited its Chair to consider organizing, at SBSTA 59, a joint meeting as part of the informal consultations on the guidance on cooperative approaches and the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, in order to prepare for consistent outcomes on these related matters at CMA 5.
			103.	The SBSTA also invited Parties to make contributions to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities for operationalizing the guidance on cooperative approaches and supporting the intersessional work referred to in paragraphs 92–94 and 101 above.
			104.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 92–94 and 101 above.
			105.	It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
			106.	The SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBSTA 59.
	XIV.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement and referred to in decision 3/CMA.3
(Agenda item 14)
		1.	Proceedings
			107.	The documents considered at this session are available on the UNFCCC website. The SBSTA had before it relevant submissions. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this matter in informal consultations co-facilitated by Kate Hancock (Australia) and Sonam Tashi (Bhutan). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			108.	The SBSTA, pursuant to paragraph 9 of decision 7/CMA.4, considered matters relating to the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
			109.	The SBSTA took note of the synthesis report by the secretariat on the views submitted by Parties and observer organizations on the matters referred to in paragraph 9 of decision 7/CMA.4.
			110.	The SBSTA also took note of the informal note prepared by the co-facilitators for this agenda item to capture the views expressed by Parties at this session on the matters referred to in paragraph 9 of decision 7/CMA.4.
			111.	The SBSTA recalled paragraph 11 of decision 7/CMA.4, whereby the secretariat was requested to organize a technical expert dialogue, to be held before SBSTA 59, ensuring broad participation of Parties, to consider the matters referred to in paragraph 9 of decision 7/CMA.4 taking into account the submissions and synthesis report referred to in paragraph 109 above.
			112.	The SBSTA agreed to also take into account the views expressed by Parties at this session at the technical expert dialogue referred to in paragraph 111 above.
			113.	Regarding the matters referred to in paragraph 9 of decision 7/CMA.4 and their relation to the corresponding matters under the cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, the SBSTA also agreed to discuss these related issues in joint sessions during the technical expert dialogue referred to in paragraph 111 above in order to prepare for consistent outcomes on these related matters at CMA 5.
			114.	The SBSTA requested that the secretariat organize the technical expert dialogue referred to in paragraph 111 above to also allow virtual participation.
			115.	The SBSTA invited Parties and observer organizations to submit via the submission portal by 15 September 2023 views on the matters referred to in paragraph 9 of decision 7/CMA.4 for consideration at SBSTA 59.
			116.	To facilitate deliberations on further guidance on the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement, the SBSTA requested its Chair to prepare an informal document on the basis of the views expressed by Parties at this session and the outcomes of the technical expert dialogue and the submissions referred to in paragraphs 111 and 115 above respectively, including textual proposals, for consideration at SBSTA 59 with a view to it recommending a draft decision on further guidance on the rules, modalities and procedures for consideration and adoption at CMA 5.
			117.	Regarding the matters referred to in paragraph 9 of decision 7/CMA.4 and their relation to the corresponding matters under the cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, the SBSTA invited its Chair to consider organizing, at SBSTA 59, a joint meeting for the informal consultations on the guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement and on the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement in order to prepare for consistent outcomes on these related matters at CMA 5.
			118.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 111–116 above.
			119.	The SBSTA requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
			120.	The SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBSTA 59.
	XV.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 4/CMA.3
(Agenda item 15)
		1.	Proceedings
			121.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to convene the 3rd meeting of the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches in a contact group co-chaired by Kristin Qui (Trinidad and Tobago) and Jacqueline Ruesga (New Zealand). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			122.	The SBSTA convened at this session the 3rd meeting of the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches.
			123.	The SBSTA welcomed:
				(a)	The views and information provided by representatives of relevant constituted bodies and institutional arrangements under or serving the Paris Agreement and/or the Convention at the meeting aimed at enhancing collaboration between them and the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches;
				(b)	The broad participation of and 12 presentations delivered by Parties and observers in the in-session workshop, including the round-table discussions, to exchange information on non-market approaches, including best practices and lessons learned related to identifying, developing and implementing such approaches, and approaches for which financial, technology and capacity-building support may be required and the support available for them;
				(c)	The use of a spin-off group during the 3rd meeting of the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches.
			124.	The SBSTA took note of:
				(a)	The technical paper prepared by the secretariat, without formal status, on possibilities for enhancing engagement with public and private sector stakeholders at meetings of the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches;
				(b)	The update from the secretariat on the status of the development and operationalization of the UNFCCC web-based platform for non-market approaches referred to in paragraph 8(b)(i) of the annex to decision 4/CMA.3 and chapter II of the annex to decision 8/CMA.4, including on the design work, timeline for completion and testing among interested Parties.
			125.	The SBSTA encouraged the secretariat to complete the development and operationalization of the UNFCCC web-based platform for non-market approaches referred to in paragraph 124‎(b) above in time for the 4th meeting of the Glasgow Committee on Non‑market Approaches.
			126.	The SBSTA took note of Parties’ views on the in-session workshop referred to in paragraph 123‎(b) above, including:
				(a)	The need for more focused and balanced organization of the in-session workshop in terms of time between presentations and the round-table discussions that formed part of the in-session workshop in order to allow for an open exchange of views, engagement and articulation of cooperation opportunities regarding specific proposals for non-market approaches between Parties and interested stakeholders, in accordance with paragraph 7(b) of the annex to decision 4/CMA.3;
				(b)	The positive outcomes, including facilitation of opportunities to connect participating Parties in identifying and exchanging information on non-market approaches and provision of an opportunity for networking to exchange information on best practices and lessons learned.
			127.	The SBSTA also took note of Parties’ views on the need for more informal settings for spin-off groups for in-depth discussion and on the range of possible topics for future spin-off groups, including, but not limited to:
				(a)	How to identify available opportunities and resources to support implementation of non-market approaches;
				(b)	The process for submitting and recording non-market approaches in the UNFCCC web-based platform for non-market approaches referred to in paragraph ‎124(b) above, taking into account provisions in paragraphs 2–3 of the annex to decision 4/CMA.3 and acknowledging that Parties participating in non-market approaches may define arrangements based on the determination by their national focal points;
				(c)	Barriers to non-market approaches and best practices for overcoming them;
				(d)	Enhancement of interaction with stakeholders;
				(e)	Preparation of non-market approaches for submission;
				(f)	Registration and recording of non-market approaches in the UNFCCC web‑based platform for non-market approaches referred to in paragraph 124‎(b) above.
			128.	The SBSTA noted the importance of the capacity-building programme referred to in paragraph 21 of decision 8/CMA.4 for supporting the identification, development and implementation of non-market approaches.
			129.	The SBSTA invited Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal by 18 September 2023 views and information on the key elements of the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement, including:
				(a)	Work programme activities referred to in chapter V of the annex to decision 4/CMA.3;
				(b)	The process for submitting and recording non-market approaches in the UNFCCC web-based platform for non-market approaches referred to in paragraph ‎124(b) above, taking into account provisions in paragraphs 2–3 of the annex to decision 4/CMA.3 and acknowledging that Parties participating in non-market approaches may define arrangements based on the determination by their national focal points;
				(c)	Possible topics for the next in-session workshop, including round-table discussions and presentations on non-market approaches, referred to in paragraph 130‎(b) below.
			130.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to:
				(a)	Prepare a synthesis report on the basis of the submissions referred to in paragraph 129 above for consideration by the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches at its 4th meeting;
				(b)	Organize the in-session workshop, including round-table discussions, as referred to in paragraph 10(a) of decision 8/CMA.4, to be held in conjunction with the 4th meeting of the Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches, on:
					(i)	The matters referred to in paragraph 129 above, taking into consideration the submissions thereon and the synthesis report referred to in paragraph 130‎(a) above;
					(ii)	Creating opportunities for cooperation and engagement on, including, but not limited to, alternative approaches as referred to in Article 5 of the Paris Agreement and decision 16/CP.21, with a focus on, inter alia, the Amazon region and other forest ecosystems, encouraging broad participation of interested public and private sector stakeholders, including Indigenous Peoples and local communities, technical experts, businesses, civil society organizations and financial institutions as referred to in paragraph 7(b) of the annex to decision 4/CMA.3.
			131.	The SBSTA encouraged Parties, public and private sector stakeholders and civil society organizations to actively engage in developing and implementing non-market approaches under the framework for such approaches.
			132.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 130 above.
			133.	It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	XVI.	Cooperation with other international organizations
(Agenda item 16)
		1.	Proceedings
			134.	The document considered at this session is available on the UNFCCC website. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed, on a proposal by the Chair, to prepare draft conclusions on this matter in consultation with Parties. At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			135.	The SBSTA noted the summary of the secretariat’s cooperative activities between May 2022 and April 2023 with United Nations entities and other international organizations that contribute to the work under the Convention.
			136.	The SBSTA took note of the importance of the secretariat’s cooperation, within the scope of mandates provided by the governing bodies, with United Nations entities and other international organizations in relation to supporting Parties’ efforts to enhance the ambition of their climate action, including with regard to mitigation, adaptation and means of implementation, and contributing to the implementation of the Paris Agreement and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
			137.	The SBSTA encouraged its Chair to continue to provide opportunities for Parties and stakeholders to exchange views on the progress of the secretariat’s cooperative activities with United Nations entities and other international organizations and to provide guidance to the secretariat on this matter at future sessions.
	XVII.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda item 17)
		138.	The SBSTA considered this matter at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in documents FCCC/SBSTA/2020/INF.3, FCCC/SBSTA/2021/INF.4 and FCCC/SBSTA/2022/INF.3.
	XVIII.	Other matters
(Agenda item 18)
		139.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. No other matters were raised.
	XIX.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 19)
		1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
			140.	At the 4th meeting, a representative of the secretariat informed the SBSTA that several activities resulting from the conclusions adopted at this session require additional resources over and above the core budget for the biennium 2022–2023 and the agreed budget for the biennium 2024–2025. Relevant requests for activities are contained in conclusions adopted under various SBSTA, including joint SBSTA–SBI, agenda items.
			141.	Under agenda item 3, “Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change”, supplementary funding in the amount of EUR 424,000 will be required in 2023, EUR 798,000 in 2024 and EUR 482,000 in 2025 for workshops, regional events, publications, consultancy services and other outputs.
			142.	Under agenda item 13, “Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 2/CMA.3”, supplementary funding in the amount of EUR 200,000 will be required in 2023 to organize an intersessional workshop and prepare a synthesis report.
			143.	The activities under agenda items 3 and 13 are recurring or long-term.
			144.	Under agenda item 15, “Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 4/CMA.3”, supplementary funding in the amount of EUR 323,000 will be required in 2023 to organize an intersessional workshop and prepare a synthesis report. These are temporary or short-term activities and would be funded from supplementary funds.
			145.	Under joint SBSTA agenda item 9 and SBI agenda item 8, “Work programme on just transition pathways referred to in the relevant paragraphs of decision 1/CMA.4”, supplementary funding in the amount of EUR 84,750 will be required in 2023 to hold a workshop and prepare synthesis and summary reports before SB 59. These are temporary or short-term activities and would be funded from voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities.
			146.	The representative of the secretariat noted that the amounts presented are preliminary and based on information available at the time. She also noted that the secretariat is counting on the continued generosity of Parties to provide supplementary funding for these activities in a timely and predictable manner, as without such contributions it will be a challenge for the secretariat to provide the requested support.
			147.	The representative concluded by noting that costs for 2026 and beyond will be reviewed in the context of preparing the budget for the biennium 2026–2027.
		2.	Closure of and report on the session
			148.	At the 4th meeting of the SBSTA, which was held together with the 4th meeting of SBI 58, statements were made by representatives of 25 Parties, including 14 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; Coalition for Rainforest Nations; Environmental Integrity Group; European Union and its member States; Group of 77 and China; Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; LDCs; Like-minded Developing Countries; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of eight UNFCCC constituencies: business and industry NGOs; children and youth NGOs; environmental NGOs; Indigenous Peoples organizations; local government and municipal authorities; research and independent NGOs; trade union NGOs; and women and gender constituency.
			149.	At the same meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report thereon and make it available to Parties.
			150.	The Chair thanked all Parties for their constructive engagement throughout the session and all observers for their engagement. He also thanked the co-chairs of contact groups and co-facilitators of informal consultations for their work, and the other presiding officers for their close collaboration. The Chair then closed the session.
			
