|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBSTA/2022/10 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 17 March 2023  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its fifty-seventh session, 
held in Sharm el-Sheikh from 6 to 12 November 2022
	Contents
		Page
		Abbreviations and acronyms		3
		I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)		4
		II.	Organizational matters 
(Agenda item 2)		4
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		4
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		5
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair		6
		D.	Mandated events		6
			III.	Report of the Adaptation Committee* 
(Agenda item 3)		7
			IV.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to 
in decision 7/CMA.3* 
(Agenda item 4)		7
			V.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damag	e associated with Climate Change Impacts* 
(Agenda item 5)		7
			VI.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss an	d Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts* 
(Agenda item 6)		8
			VII.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture* 
(Agenda item 7)		8
			VIII.	Matters relating to the work programme for urgently scaling up mitigation ambition and 
implementation referred to in paragraph 27 of decision 1/CMA.3* 
(Agenda item 8)		8
			IX.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement* 
(Agenda item 9)		9
			X.	Matters related to science and review 
(Agenda item 10)		10
		A.	Research and systematic observation		10
			B.	Second periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of 
overall progress towards achieving it*		12
			XI.	Development and transfer of technologies: joint annual report of the Technology Executive
Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network* 
(Agenda item 11)		12
			XII.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving
the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement*
(Agenda item 12)		12
			XIII.	Methodological issues under the Convention 
(Agenda item 13)		13
				A.	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		13
				B.	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of biennial reports and 
national communications of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		13
				C.	Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories for Parties included in 
Annex I to the Convention		14
		D.	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases		14
		E.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport		15
			XIV.	Matters relating to reporting and review under Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: options for
conducting reviews on a voluntary basis of the information reported pursuant to chapter IV of the annex to decision 18/CMA.1, and respective training courses needed to facilitate these voluntary reviews (Agenda item 14)		15
			XV.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement and
in decision 2/CMA.3
(Agenda item 15)		16
			XVI.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the
Paris Agreement and referred to in decision 3/CMA.3 
(Agenda item 16)		16
			XVII.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, 
paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 4/CMA.3 
(Agenda item 17)		16
			XVIII.	Annual reports on technical reviews 
(Agenda item 18)		18
				A.	Technical review of information reported under the Convention by Parties included in 
Annex I to the Convention in their biennial reports and national communications		18
				B.	Technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to 
the Convention		18
				C.	Technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties
included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol(c))		18
			XIX.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 19)		18
			XX.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 20)		19
		
Abbreviations and acronyms
	| CMA | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement |
	| CMP | Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol |
	| COP | Conference of the Parties |
	| GCNMA | Glasgow Committee on Non-market Approaches |
	| GCOS | Global Climate Observing System |
	| GHG | greenhouse gas |
	| ICAO | International Civil Aviation Organization |
	| IMO | International Maritime Organization |
	| IPCC | Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change |
	| NMA | non-market approach |
	| SBI | Subsidiary Body for Implementation |
	| SBSTA | Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice |
	| UNESCO | United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization |
	| WMO | World Meteorological Organization |
	
	
	I.	Opening of the session
(Agenda item 1)
		1.	SBSTA 57 was held at the Sharm el-Sheikh International Convention Center in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, from 6 to 12 November 2022.
		2.	The Chair of the SBSTA, Tosi Mpanu Mpanu (Democratic Republic of the Congo), opened the session on Sunday, 6 November, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Kakhaberi Mdivani (Georgia) as Vice-Chair and Zita Kassa Wilks (Gabon) as Rapporteur.
	II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
			3.	At its 1st meeting, on 6 November, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations and adopted the agenda as presented, as follows:
			4.	Opening of the session.
				5.	Organizational matters:
					(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
					(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
					(c)	Election of officers other than the Chair;
					(d)	Mandated events.
			6.	Report of the Adaptation Committee.*
			7.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3.*
				8.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.*
			9.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.*
				10.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture.*
				11.	Matters relating to the work programme for urgently scaling up mitigation ambition and implementation referred to in paragraph 27 of decision 1/CMA.3.*
				12.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement.*
				13.	Matters related to science and review:
					(a)	Research and systematic observation;
					(b)	Second periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it.*
				14.	Development and transfer of technologies: joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network.*
				15.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement.*
				16.	Methodological issues under the Convention:
					(a)	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(b)	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of biennial reports and national communications of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(c)	Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(d)	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases;
					(e)	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport.
				17.	Matters relating to reporting and review under Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: options for conducting reviews on a voluntary basis of the information reported pursuant to chapter IV of the annex to decision 18/CMA.1, and respective training courses needed to facilitate these voluntary reviews.
				18.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 2/CMA.3.
				19.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement and referred to in decision 3/CMA.3.
				20.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 4/CMA.3.
				21.	Annual reports on technical reviews:
					(a)	Technical review of information reported under the Convention by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention in their biennial reports and national communications;
					(b)	Technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(c)	Technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol.
				22.	Other matters.
				23.	Closure of and report on the session.
		B.	Organization of the work of the session
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			24.	At the 1st meeting of the SBSTA, the Chair drew the attention of Parties to the deadline for all groups to conclude their work by 6 p.m. on Friday, 11 November, to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary, which was to be convened on Saturday, 12 November. Recalling his scenario note, the Chair reminded delegates of the need to work in a manner that maximizes negotiation time and ensures timely closure of the session.
			25.	The Chair noted that he was coordinating closely with the SBI Chair on the work under the 10 joint agenda items. He encouraged Parties to keep all informal consultations open to observers wherever possible, in accordance with standard practice and relevant SBI conclusions.
				26.	On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to proceed on that basis and in line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
				27.	At the same meeting statements were made by eight intergovernmental organizations: Committee on Earth Observation Satellites on its behalf and on behalf of the Coordination Group for Meteorological Satellites, GCOS, ICAO, IMO, Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO, IPCC, WMO and World Climate Research Programme.
				28.	At the 2nd meeting of the SBSTA, on 6 November, which was held jointly with the 2nd meetings of the COP, the CMP, the CMA and the SBI, statements were made by representatives of 21 Parties, including 14 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; Coalition for Rainforest Nations; Environmental Integrity Group; European Union and its member States; Group of 77 and China; Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; least developed countries; Like-minded Developing Countries; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of nine UNFCCC constituencies: indigenous peoples organizations; local government and municipal authorities; the women and gender constituency; and business and industry, children and youth, environmental, farmers, research and independent, and trade union non-governmental organizations.
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			29.	At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled that the SBSTA was expected to elect its Vice‑Chair and Rapporteur for 2023. He reminded Parties that consultations on nominations were ongoing and proposed to return to this sub-item at the SBSTA closing plenary on 12 November.
			30.	At the 3rd meeting, on 12 November, the Chair informed Parties that the secretariat had not received any nominations. He reminded Parties that, in accordance with rule 22, paragraph 2, of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the Vice-Chair, Kakhaberi Mdivani, and the Rapporteur, Zita Kassa Wilks, will remain in office until their successors are elected at the next session.
		D.	Mandated events
(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
			31.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA took note of the information provided by its Chair on the mandated events being held in conjunction with this session.
	III.	Report of the Adaptation Committee*
(Agenda item 3)
		32.	The SBSTA had before it document FCCC/SB/2022/5, Add.1–2. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited a representative of the Adaptation Committee to deliver a brief oral report on its work. At the same meeting, the Chair recalled that COP 27 and CMA 4 had referred to the SBSTA and the SBI the consideration of the review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee. The SBSTA agreed that the matters would be considered under this item, together with the equally titled SBI 57 agenda item 11, in informal consultations co-facilitated by Pilar Bueno (Argentina) and Morgane Chiocchia (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to recommend to COP 27 and CMA 4 to consider these matters on the basis of the draft text on the UNFCCC website.,
	IV.	Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation referred to in decision 7/CMA.3*
(Agenda item 4)
		33.	The SBSTA had before it document FCCC/SB/2022/INF.2. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 57 agenda item 14 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mattias Frumerie (Sweden) and Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to recommend to CMA 4 to consider these matters taking into account the draft text on the UNFCCC website and relevant views from Parties and groups of Parties, recognizing that the draft text does not represent consensus among Parties and further work by the CMA is necessary to finalize the decision.
	V.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts*
(Agenda item 5)
		34.	The SBSTA had before it document FCCC/SB/2022/2 and Add.1–2. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 57 agenda item 15 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Lucas di Pietro (Argentina) and Cornelia Jaeger (Austria). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption by the appropriate body or bodies.,
	VI.	Matters relating to the Santiago network under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts*
(Agenda item 6)
		35.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 57 agenda item 16 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Lucas di Pietro and Cornelia Jaeger. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to recommend to the appropriate body or bodies to consider these matters at their session(s) held in November 2022 taking into account the informal note on the UNFCCC website.,
	VII.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture*
(Agenda item 7)
		36.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 57 agenda item 10 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Monika Figaj (Poland) and Milagros Sandoval (Peru). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to recommend to COP 27 to consider these matters taking into account the draft texts on the UNFCCC website.,
	VIII.	Matters relating to the work programme for urgently scaling up mitigation ambition and implementation referred to in paragraph 27 of decision 1/CMA.3*
(Agenda item 8)
		1.	Proceedings
			37.	The SBSTA had before it relevant submissions. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 57 agenda item 7 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Carlos Fuller (Belize) and Kay Harrison (New Zealand). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
		38.	The SBSTA and the SBI considered matters relating to the work programme for urgently scaling up mitigation ambition and implementation in this critical decade in a manner that complements the global stocktake referred to in paragraph 27 of decision 1/CMA.3 with a view to recommending a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at CMA 4.
		39.	The SBSTA and the SBI welcomed the submissions from Parties and the discussions held at the mandated pre-sessional workshop on the work programme, which helped to enhance understanding of the proposals Parties put forward in their submissions and advance consideration of matters relating to the work programme.
		40.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to recommend to CMA 4 the draft decision text on this matter for consideration, recognizing that this text does not represent a consensus among Parties and that further work by the CMA is necessary to finalize the decision at this session.
	IX.	Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement*
(Agenda item 9)
		1.	Proceedings
			41.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings.
			42.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 57 agenda item 8 in a joint contact group co-chaired by Hana Alhashim (United Arab Emirates) and Alison Campbell (United Kingdom). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			43.	The SBSTA and the SBI emphasized the importance of the global stocktake for achieving the long-term goals of the Paris Agreement.
			44.	The SBSTA and the SBI expressed their appreciation to the co-facilitators of the technical dialogue for their efforts to deliver the second meeting of that dialogue, and to facilitators, rapporteurs and participating experts, Parties and non-Party stakeholders for their contributions to and engagement in this meeting of the dialogue.
			45.	The SBSTA and the SBI also expressed their appreciation to the co-facilitators of the technical dialogue for their efforts to prepare the summary report on the first meeting of the technical dialogue, the informal consultations organized on this report on 6 October 2022 and the information note for the second meeting of the technical dialogue, held on 18 October 2022.
			46.	The SBSTA and the SBI requested the co-facilitators of the technical dialogue to take into account feedback provided by Parties at the second meeting of the technical dialogue, and by the joint contact group of the SBSTA and the SBI, when preparing the summary report on the second meeting and designing the third meeting of the technical dialogue, in order to ensure an inclusive, balanced, comprehensive and focused Party-driven process, with the participation of non-Party stakeholders, that facilitates the broad participation of Parties and non-Party stakeholders.
			47.	The SBSTA and the SBI also requested the co-facilitators of the technical dialogue to prepare the summary report on the second meeting of the technical dialogue well in advance of the third meeting and to continue the practice of engaging with Parties, noting that the co‑facilitators are similarly encouraged to engage with non-Party stakeholders, after publishing the summary report.
			48.	The SBSTA and the SBI reiterated the call for inputs referred to in paragraph 19 of decision 19/CMA.1 and encouraged Parties and non-Party stakeholders to submit such inputs for consideration at the third meeting of the technical dialogue.
			49.	The SBSTA and the SBI acknowledged the need to prepare for the consideration of outputs component of the first global stocktake in a manner that aligns with paragraphs 3–6 of decision 19/CMA.1.
			50.	The SBSTA and the SBI invited submissions by 15 February 2023 on views on the approach to the consideration of outputs component of the first global stocktake.
			51.	The SBSTA and the SBI requested their Chairs, with the support of the secretariat, to:
			Hold an intersessional consultation, in a hybrid format, in April 2023 on preparations for the consideration of outputs component of the first global stocktake, taking into account the submissions referred to in paragraph 30 above;
			Convene an intersessional in-person workshop in October 2023 to develop elements for the consideration of outputs component of the first global stocktake, to inform the work of the joint contact group.
			52.	The SBSTA and the SBI invited the high-level committee referred to in paragraph 33 of decision 19/CMA.1 to provide an update during the fifty-eighth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (June 2023) on progress in planning their high-level events.
			53.	The SBSTA and the SBI reiterated their encouragement to Parties and non-Party stakeholders to hold events, at the local, national, regional and international level, as appropriate, in support of the global stocktake.
			54.	The SBSTA and the SBI encouraged Parties to make voluntary contributions for the timely implementation of activities included in these conclusions and under the first global stocktake.
	X.	Matters related to science and review
(Agenda item 10)
		A.	Research and systematic observation
(Agenda sub-item 10(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				55.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the item would be considered in informal consultations co-facilitated by Elizabeth Bush (Canada) and Ladislaus Chang'a (Tanzania). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				56.	The SBSTA recognized the vital importance of robust Earth observation systems and related long-term data records for enhanced understanding of the global climate system and its changes and for adaptation and mitigation action.
				57.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the information reported in the statements delivered at the opening meeting of this session by representatives of GCOS, Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO, IPCC, Joint Committee on Earth Observation Satellites/Coordination Group for Meteorological Satellites Working Group on Climate, WMO and World Climate Research Programme.
				58.	The SBSTA took note of the WMO Provisional State of the Global Climate 2022 report and the 2022 WMO Greenhouse Gas Bulletin and welcomed the United Nations Global Early Warning Initiative for the Implementation of Climate Adaptation.
				59.	The SBSTA noted with utmost concern the state of the global climate system as conveyed at Earth Information Day 2022.
				60.	The SBSTA took note of the informal summary report on Earth Information Day 2021. It expressed its appreciation to its Chair and the secretariat for organizing Earth Information Day 2022, held at this session, thanked representatives of participating organizations and programmes for their valuable contributions and invited its Chair, with the assistance of the secretariat, to prepare an informal summary report on Earth Information Day 2022.
				61.	The SBSTA recognized the ongoing efforts of the systematic observation community, as presented at Earth Information Day 2022, to provide updates on the state of the global climate, information for mitigation, including estimates of GHG fluxes, climate services for adaptation and early warning systems; to improve cooperation among observing networks; and to better integrate observations from multiple sources.
				62.	The SBSTA welcomed the 2022 GCOS Implementation Plan and the 2022 GCOS essential climate variables requirements. It encouraged Parties and relevant organizations, as appropriate, to work towards the implementation of the 2022 GCOS Implementation Plan, in accordance with Article 5 of the Convention.
				63.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the progress in supporting systematic observation, such as through the development of the Systematic Observation Financing Facility. It encouraged the Facility to continue to prioritize the least developed countries and small island developing States in its provision of support and to evaluate opportunities to support developing countries. It also encouraged efforts to further strengthen support for sustained systematic observations of the ocean, cryosphere, land, biosphere and atmosphere.
				64.	The SBSTA noted the need to maintain, strengthen and sustain capacity for long-term data collection and data management, including data rescue, digitization, analysis, archiving and availability. It encouraged Parties and relevant organizations to continue to establish and support open data-sharing and to develop openly available, reliable, fit-for-purpose and accessible data products, as appropriate.
				65.	The SBSTA emphasized the need to address systematic observation gaps, particularly in developing countries and for ocean, mountain, desert and polar regions and the cryosphere in order to improve understanding of climate change, climate-related risks and tipping points, and adaptation limits and to ensure enhanced delivery of climate services and early warning systems.
				66.	The SBSTA noted with concern the existing gaps in the global climate observing system. It recognized the need to enhance the coordination of activities by the systematic observation community and improve its ability to provide useful and actionable climate information for mitigation, adaptation and early warning systems, as well as information to enable understanding of adaptation limits and of attribution of extreme events.
				67.	The SBSTA invited Parties and relevant organizations to submit via the submission portal, by 31 August 2023, views on possible themes for and ways to organize Earth Information Day 2023, to be held in conjunction with SBSTA 59 (November–December 2023).
				68.	The SBSTA recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 27.
		B.	Second periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it*
(Agenda sub-item 10(b))
			69.	The SBSTA had before it document FCCC/SB/2022/3. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 57 agenda item 9 in a joint contact group co-chaired by Leon Charles (Grenada) and Andrew Ferrone (Luxembourg). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to recommend to COP 27 to consider the matter taking into account the draft text on the UNFCCC website.,
	XI.	Development and transfer of technologies: joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network*
(Agenda item 11)
		70.	The SBSTA had before it document FCCC/SB/2022/4. At its 1st meeting, the Chair invited a representative of the Technology Executive Committee and a representative of the Climate Technology Centre and Network’s Advisory Board to deliver brief oral reports on their respective work. The SBSTA agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 57 agenda sub-item 17(a) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Stella Gama (Malawi) and Elfriede More (Austria). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA recommended draft decisions for consideration and adoption at COP 27 and CMA 4.
	XII.	Matters relating to the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures serving the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement*
(Agenda item 12)
		71.	The SBSTA had before it document FCCC/SB/2022/6. At its 1st meeting, the Chair invited a representative of the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures to deliver a brief oral report on its work. The SBSTA agreed that the item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 57 agenda item 20 in a contact group co-chaired by Andrei Marcu (Papua New Guinea) and Daniel Waterschoot (European Union). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to forward these matters to the COP, the CMP and the CMA for further guidance, taking into account the draft text for this agenda item, available on the UNFCCC website.,
	XIII.	Methodological issues under the Convention
(Agenda item 13)
		A.	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 13(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				72.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this matter would be considered in informal consultations co-facilitated by Jae Jung (Republic of Korea) and Harry Vreuls (Netherlands). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				73.	The SBSTA continued consideration of the training programme for review experts for the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention taking into account paragraphs 42 and 44 of decision 1/CP.24.
				74.	The SBSTA noted the importance of the training programme for building the capacity of technical experts from developing countries in relation to reporting and review.
				75.	The SBSTA agreed to extend the implementation of the training programme until the training programme for technical experts participating in the technical expert review of biennial transparency reports, outlined in annex VII to decision 5/CMA.3, begins. The SBSTA also agreed to consider this matter at its session following any Party included in Annex I to the Convention withdrawing from the Paris Agreement.
				76.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 55 above.
				77.	It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		B.	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of biennial reports and national communications of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 13(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				78.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this matter would be considered in informal consultations co-facilitated by Jae Jung and Harry Vreuls. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				79.	The SBSTA continued consideration of the training programme for review experts for the technical review of biennial reports and national communications of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention taking into account paragraphs 43–44 of decision 1/CP.24.
				80.	The SBSTA noted the importance of the training programme for building the capacity of technical experts from developing countries in relation to reporting and review.
				81.	The SBSTA agreed to extend the implementation of the training programme until the training programme for technical experts participating in the technical expert review of biennial transparency reports, outlined in annex VII to decision 5/CMA.3, begins. The SBSTA also agreed to consider this matter at its session following any Party included in Annex I to the Convention withdrawing from the Paris Agreement.
				82.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 61 above.
				83.	It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		C.	Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 13(c))
			84.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this matter would be considered in informal consultations co-facilitated by Thiago Mendes (Mozambique) and Daniela Romano (Italy). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 27.
		D.	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases
(Agenda sub-item 13(d))
			1.	Proceedings
				85.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this matter would be considered in informal consultations co-facilitated by Camila Labarca Wyneken (Chile) and Marina Vitullo (Italy). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				86.	The SBSTA continued consideration of the common metrics used to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of anthropogenic GHG emissions by sources and removals by sinks within the framework of methodological issues under the Convention.
				87.	The SBSTA noted that, pursuant to paragraph 37 of the modalities, procedures and guidelines for the transparency framework for action and support referred to in Article 13 of the Paris Agreement, Parties to the Paris Agreement shall use the 100-year time-horizon global warming potential values from the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, or the 100-year time-horizon global warming potential values from a subsequent IPCC assessment report agreed upon by the CMA, to report aggregate GHG emissions and removals, expressed in carbon dioxide equivalent. The SBSTA also noted that each Party may in addition use other metrics (e.g. global temperature potential) to report supplemental information on aggregate GHG emissions and removals, expressed in carbon dioxide equivalent. The SBSTA further noted that the 100-year time-horizon global warming potential values referred to in decision 18/CMA.1, annex, paragraph 37, shall be those listed in table 8.A.1 in appendix 8.A to the contribution of Working Group I to the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, excluding the value for fossil methane.
				88.	The SBSTA noted the importance of ensuring consistent and synchronized requirements for reporting on aggregate GHG emissions and removals expressed in carbon dioxide equivalent under the Convention and the Paris Agreement and recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 27.
				89.	The SBSTA invited the IPCC to present the findings on emission metrics contained in its Sixth Assessment Report at an in-session technical workshop at SBSTA 58 (June 2023) and requested the secretariat to prepare a technical report as an outcome of the in-session technical workshop.
				90.	The SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of common metrics at SBSTA 66 (2027).
				91.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 69 above.
				92.	It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		E.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport
(Agenda sub-item 13(e))
			93.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that this matter would be considered in informal consultations co-facilitated by Martin Cames (Germany) and Pacifica F. Achieng Ogola (Kenya).
			94.	At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA noted that the representatives of the secretariats of ICAO and IMO were present at the informal consultations under this agenda item, were requested to answer questions from Parties and provided some answers on the submissions from ICAO and IMO at the initial informal consultation, held on 7 November 2022.
			95.	The SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of this matter at SBSTA 58.
	XIV.	Matters relating to reporting and review under Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: options for conducting reviews on a voluntary basis of the information reported pursuant to chapter IV of the annex to decision 18/CMA.1, and respective training courses needed to facilitate these voluntary reviews
(Agenda item 14)
		96.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the item would be considered in informal consultations co-facilitated by Julia Gardiner (Australia) and Yamikani J.D. Idriss (Malawi). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at CMA 4.
	XV.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 2/CMA.3
(Agenda item 15)
		97.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the item would be considered in informal consultations co-facilitated by Kuki Soejachmoen (Indonesia) and Peer Stiansen (Norway).
		98.	At its 3rd meeting, pursuant to the requests of the CMA, the SBSTA agreed to recommend to CMA 4 to consider the draft decision on the UNFCCC website on guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 2/CMA.3, recognizing that it does not represent consensus among Parties and that further work by the CMA is necessary to finalize it.
	XVI.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement and referred to in decision 3/CMA.3
(Agenda item 16)
		99.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the item would be considered in informal consultations co-facilitated by Kate Hancock (Australia) and Sonam Tashi (Bhutan).
		100.	At its 3rd meeting, pursuant to the request of the CMA, the SBSTA agreed to recommend to the CMA to consider for inclusion in its decision on guidance on the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement the draft text on the UNFCCC website.
		101.	The SBSTA noted that further work by the CMA is necessary to prepare a consolidated decision, also taking into account the recommendations on this matter of the Supervisory Body for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement. The SBSTA recognized that the recommendation being forwarded for consideration at CMA 4 does not represent consensus among Parties and that further work by the CMA is necessary to finalize it.
	XVII.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 4/CMA.3
(Agenda item 17)
		1.	Proceedings
			102.	The SBSTA had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2022/8 and FCCC/SBSTA/2022/9. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the item would be considered in informal consultations co-facilitated by Maria Al Jishi (Saudi Arabia) and Jacqueline Ruesga (New Zealand). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			103.	The SBSTA, pursuant to paragraph 9 of the annex to decision 4/CMA.3, agreed to forward to the CMA as a report of the GCNMA, as appropriate, information on the progress and outcomes of the work programme under the framework for NMAs referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement, as relevant, contained in paragraphs 84–86 below.
			104.	The SBSTA convened GCNMA 2 in accordance with paragraph 5 of the annex to decision 4/CMA.3 and, on the basis of the outcomes of the work programme at GCNMA 1, continued its consideration of:
			Developing and recommending a schedule for implementing the work programme activities referred to in chapter V of the annex (Work programme activities) to decision 4/CMA.3, which may contain the timeline and expected outcomes for each activity, including specifications for the UNFCCC web-based platform referred to in paragraph 8(b)(i) of the annex to decision 4/CMA.3, such as its functions, form, target users and information to be contained thereon;
			Identifying focus areas of the work programme activities;
			Identifying existing NMAs under the framework that are in accordance with the provisions referred to in chapter II of the annex (Non-market approaches under the framework) to decision 4/CMA.3;
			Identifying and evaluating positive and other experience of existing linkages, synergies, coordination and implementation in relation to NMAs;
			Developing and implementing tools, with the assistance of the secretariat, including a UNFCCC web-based platform for recording and exchanging information on NMAs, including information identified through the work programme, and supporting the identification of opportunities for participating Parties to identify, develop and implement NMAs.
			105.	The SBSTA welcomed:
			The broad participation of experts in the in-session workshop on the matters referred to in paragraph 6 of decision 4/CMA.3, the views and information submitted by Parties and observers on these matters, and the relevant synthesis report prepared by the secretariat, which served as inputs to the in-session workshop, and the report on the in-session workshop, which served as inputs to the implementation of the work programme activities referred to in paragraph 84(a), (b), (c) and (e) above;
			The broad participation of relevant experts in the virtual intersessional workshop on the specifications for the UNFCCC web-based platform, the views and information submitted by Parties and observers, including on this matter, and the technical paper prepared by the secretariat on this matter, which served as inputs to the implementation of the work programme activity referred to in paragraph 84(e) above, including the workshop;
			The synthesis report prepared by the secretariat on the views and information submitted by Parties and observers on the matters referred to in paragraph 84 above and the technical paper prepared by the secretariat on the existing linkages, synergies and facilitated coordination and implementation of NMAs in the local, subnational, national and global context; how Parties have addressed the matter referred to in paragraph 4(e) of the annex to decision 4/CMA.3; and how Parties have identified, developed and implemented NMAs at the country, regional and global level, which served as inputs to the implementation of the work programme activities referred to in paragraph 84 (a), (c), (d) and (e) above.
			106.	Pursuant to the request of the CMA, the SBSTA agreed to recommend to CMA 4 to consider the draft text on the UNFCCC website on the schedule for implementing the activities of the work programme under the framework for NMAs referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement and in decision 4/CMA.3, recognizing that this text does not represent consensus among Parties and that further work by the CMA is necessary to finalize the decision.
	XVIII.	Annual reports on technical reviews
(Agenda item 18)
		A.	Technical review of information reported under the Convention by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention in their biennial reports and national communications
(Agenda sub-item 18(a))
			107.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2022/INF.2.
		B.	Technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 18(b))
			108.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. At the same meeting, it agreed to defer the consideration of this matter to SBSTA 58.
		C.	Technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 18(c))
			109.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2022/INF.4.
	XIX.	Other matters
(Agenda item 19)
		110.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. No other matters were raised.
	XX.	Closure of and report on the session
(Agenda item 20)
		1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
			111.	At the 3rd meeting of the SBSTA, on 12 November, a representative of the secretariat informed the SBSTA that several activities resulting from the conclusions adopted at this session require additional resources over and above the core budget for the biennium 2022–‍2023. Relevant requests for activities are contained in conclusions adopted under various SBSTA agenda items, including joint SBSTA–SBI items.
			112.	Under agenda item 13(a), “Training programme for review experts for the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention”, supplementary funding of EUR 150,000 will be required in 2023 for consultants, the e‑learning course platform, online examination and licenses, online course delivery and staff costs for supporting implementation.
			113.	Under agenda item 13(b), “Training programme for review experts for the technical review of biennial reports and national communications of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention”, supplementary funding of EUR 21,000 will be required in 2023 for staff costs for learning management systems and the delivery of an online course.
			114.	Under agenda item 13(c), “Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention”, a one-time cost of EUR 15,000 for the implementation of CRF Reporter and ongoing annual hosting costs of EUR 25,000 are expected to be absorbed from existing resources.
			115.	Under agenda item 13(d), “Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases”, supplementary funding of EUR 28,000 will be required in 2023 for the preparation of a technical report and relevant presentations as outcomes of the in-session technical workshop.
			116.	The activities under agenda item 13(a), (b) and (d) are temporary or short term and would therefore be funded from supplementary funds.
			117.	Under agenda item 14, “Matters relating to reporting and review under Article 13 of the Paris Agreement: options for conducting reviews on a voluntary basis of the information reported pursuant to chapter IV of the annex to decision 18/CMA.1, and respective training courses needed to facilitate these voluntary reviews”, supplementary funding of EUR 467,000 in 2022–2023 will be required for voluntary reviews and development and implementation of training courses. These activities are recurring or long-term and would therefore be funded from the core budget in future (post-2023) bienniums if approved by the appropriate governing bodies. This amount is preliminary and based on information available as at November 2022.
			118.	Under the joint SBSTA–SBI agenda item “Matters relating to the global stocktake under the Paris Agreement”, supplementary funding of EUR 1,022,000 will be required in 2023 to hold an intersessional consultation in a hybrid format and to convene an intersessional in-person workshop. This activity is temporary or short term and would therefore be funded from supplementary funds.
		2.	Closure of and report on the session
			119.	At the resumed 3rd meeting of the SBSTA, which was held jointly with the resumed 3rd meeting of the SBI, statements were made by representatives of 16 Parties, including 12 on behalf of groups of Parties: African Group; Alliance of Small Island States; Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Environmental Integrity Group; European Union and its member States; Group of 77 and China; Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean; least developed countries; Like-minded Developing Countries; and Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by seven representatives of UNFCCC constituencies: the women and gender constituency, and business and industry, children and youth, environmental, farmers, and research and independent non-governmental organizations.
			120.	At the same meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session and make it available to all Parties.
			121.	At the end of the 3rd meeting, the Chair thanked all Parties for the constructive engagement throughout the session and all observers for their engagement. He also thanked the co-chairs and co-facilitators for their work, as well as the other presiding officers for the close collaboration. The Chair then closed the session.
		
			
