|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBSTA/2018/8 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 8 March 2019  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and 
	Technological Advice on its forty-ninth session,
	held in Katowice from 2 to 8 December 2018
	
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
			I.	Opening of the session  
(Agenda item 1)			1–2	3
			II.	Organizational matters 
(Agenda item 2)			3–11	3
				A.	Adoption of the agenda 			3–4	3
				B.	Organization of the work of the session		5–9	4
				C.	Election of officers other than the Chair		10	5
				D.	Mandated events		11	5
			III.	Report of the Adaptation Committee: 2018 report; and matters referred to in 
paragraphs 41, 42 and 45 of decision 1/CP.21 
(Agenda item 3)		12–13	5
			IV.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for 
Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts  
(Agenda item 4)			14	6
			V.	Development and transfer of technologies 
(Agenda item 5)		15–16	6
				A.	Technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement	15	6
				B.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate 
Technology Centre and Network		16	6
			VI.	Research and systematic observation 
(Agenda item 6)			17	7
			VII.	Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform 
(Agenda item 7)			18	7
			VIII.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture 
(Agenda item 8)		19–26	7
			IX.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
(Agenda item 9)		27–35	8
				A.	Improved forum and work programme		27–33	8
				B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the 
forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures		34	10
				C.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol		35	10
			X.	Methodological issues under the Convention: emissions from fuel used for 
international aviation and maritime transport
(Agenda item 10)		36–37	10
			XI.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 11)			38	11
				A.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, 
of the Paris Agreement			11
				B.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, 
paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement			11
				C.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to 
in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement		38	11
			XII.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through 
public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 12)			39	11
			XIII.	Reports on other activities
(Agenda item 13)		40–42	11
				A.	Annual report on the technical review of information reported under the 
Convention by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention in their biennial reports 
and national communications		40	11
				B.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of 
Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		41	11
				C.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other 
information reported by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, 
paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol		42	12
			XIV.	Report on matters related to the Paris Agreement work programme under agenda 
items 3, 5(a), 9(b), 11 and 12  
(Agenda items 3, 5(a), 9(b), 11 and 12)		43–44	12
			XV.	Other matters  
(Agenda item 14)			45	12
			XVI.	Closure of and report on the session  
(Agenda item 15)		46–51	12
		
		
	I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)
		1.	The forty-ninth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held at the International Conference Centre in Katowice, Poland, from 2 to 8 December 2018.
		2.	The Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Paul Watkinson (France), opened the session on Sunday, 2 December, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Ms. Annela Anger-Kraavi (Estonia) as Vice-Chair and Mr. Aderito Manuel Fernandes Santana (Sao Tome and Principe) as Rapporteur of the SBSTA.
	II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
			3.	At its 1st meeting, on 2 December, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive 	Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBSTA/2018/7).
			4.	The agenda was adopted as follows:
			1.	Opening of the session.
			2.	Organizational matters:
				(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
				(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
				(c)	Election of officers other than the Chair;
				(d)	Mandated events.
				3.	Report of the Adaptation Committee: 2018 report; and matters referred to in paragraphs 41, 42 and 45 of decision 1/CP.21.
				4.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.
			5.	Development and transfer of technologies:
				(a)	Technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement;
				(b)	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network.
			6.	Research and systematic observation.
			7.	Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform.
			8.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture.
			9.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
				(a)	Improved forum and work programme;
					(b)	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures;
				(c)	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol.
				10.	Methodological issues under the Convention: emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport.
				
			11.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement:
				(a)	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement;
				(b)	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement;
				(c)	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement.
				12.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement.
			13.	Reports on other activities:
				(a)	Annual report on the technical review of information reported under the Convention by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention in their biennial reports and national communications;
				(b)	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(c)	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol.
			14.	Other matters.
			15.	Closure of and report on the session.
		B.	Organization of the work of the session 
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			5.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. The Chair drew attention to the deadline for all groups to conclude their work by 1 p.m. on Friday, 7 December, to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary, which was to be convened on Saturday, 8 December. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to proceed on that basis and in line with previously adopted conclusions of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices. At the same meeting, statements were made by representatives of four intergovernmental organizations: International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), International Maritime Organization (IMO), Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and World Meteorological Organization. A statement was made by the representative of one Party.
			6.	At the 2nd meeting of the SBSTA, on 2 December, which was held jointly with the 2nd meeting of the Conference of the Parties (COP) at its twenty-forth session, the 2nd meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) at its fourteenth session, the 22nd meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) at its first session, the 2nd meeting of the SBI at its forty-ninth session and the 21st meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Paris Agreement (APA) at its first session, statements were made by representatives of 13 Parties on behalf of groups of Parties: the African Group; the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS); the Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty; Brazil, South Africa, India and China; the Environmental Integrity Group; the European Union (EU) and its member States; the Group of 77 and China; the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean (AILAC); the least developed countries (LDCs); the Like-minded Developing Countries; and the Umbrella Group. Statements were also made on behalf of business and industry non-governmental organizations (NGOs), environmental NGOs, indigenous peoples organizations, local government and municipal authorities, research and independent NGOs, trade union NGOs, women and gender NGOs and youth NGOs.
			7.	Between 4 and 7 December, the SBSTA and SBI Chairs and APA Co-Chairs convened joint meetings of heads of delegation to inform Parties of progress in the work of the SBSTA, the SBI and the APA pertaining to the implementation of the Paris Agreement work programme (PAWP) and to address unresolved issues.
			8.	At the first part of its 3rd meeting, on 8 December, the SBSTA considered all the non‑PAWP-related items on its agenda and adopted conclusions on these matters as presented in this report. At the second part of its 3rd meeting, also on 8 December, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP-related items on its agenda as presented in paragraph 44 below.
			9.	At the 4th meeting of the SBSTA, on 8 December, which was held jointly with the 4th meeting of the SBI and the 23rd meeting of the APA, closing statements were made by representatives of Parties and groups of Parties (see para. 50 below).
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			10.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled rule 27 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, whereby the SBSTA was expected to elect its Vice-Chair and Rapporteur. At the same meeting, the SBSTA noted that the consultations on the nominations were ongoing. At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA elected Ms. Anger-Kraavi as Vice-Chair and Ms. Stella Gama (Malawi) as Rapporteur.
		D.	Mandated events
(Agenda sub-item 2(d))
			11.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information provided on the mandated events being held at the session.
	III.	Report of the Adaptation Committee: 2018 report; and matters referred to in paragraphs 41, 42 and 45 of decision 1/CP.21
(Agenda item 3)
		12.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2018/3. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the 2018 report of the Adaptation Committee would be considered jointly under this item and the equally titled SBI 49 agenda item 11 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Gabriela Fischerova (Slovakia) and Ms. Pepetua Latasi (Tuvalu). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption at COP 24.
		13.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA also agreed that the PAWP-related matters referred to in paragraphs 41, 42 and 45 of decision 1/CP.21 would be considered jointly under this item and the equally titled SBI 49 agenda item 3 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Fischerova and Ms. Latasi. At the 2nd part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP-related items on its agenda, including this one, as presented in paragraph 44 below.
	IV.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts 
(Agenda item 4)
		14.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2018/1. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the agenda item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 49 agenda item 10 and that it would convene informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Lisa Gittos (Australia) and Mr. Lucas di Pietro (Argentina). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 24.
	V.	Development and transfer of technologies
(Agenda item 5)
		A.	Technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 5(a))
			15.	The SBSTA considered this PAWP-related agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and the second part of its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize) and Ms. Mette Moglestue (Norway). At its second part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP items on its agenda, including on this matter, as presented in paragraph 44 below.
		B.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network
(Agenda sub-item 5(b))
			16.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2018/2. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 49 agenda sub-item 14(b) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Gama and Ms. Ulrika Raab (Sweden). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to recommend a draft decision on enhancing climate technology development and transfer throughout the Technology Mechanism for consideration and adoption at COP 24.
		VI.	Research and systematic observation
(Agenda item 6)
			17.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Festus Luboyera (Uganda) and Mr. Stefan Roesner (Germany). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA noted that Parties had not been able to agree on conclusions; in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the item will be on the provisional agenda for the next session (June 2019). At the same meeting, statements were made by representatives of 30 Parties, including on behalf of AILAC, AOSIS, the Environmental Integrity Group, the EU and its member States, and the LDCs.
	VII.	Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform
(Agenda item 7)
		18.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Anger-Kraavi and Mr. Majid Shafiepour (Islamic Republic of Iran). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 24. At the same meeting, statements were made by representatives of 11 Parties, including on behalf of the EU and its member States. A statement was also made by a representative of indigenous peoples.
	VIII.	Koronivia joint work on agriculture
(Agenda item 8)
		1.	Proceedings
			19.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the agenda item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 49 agenda item 9 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Heikki Granholm (Finland) and Ms. Milagros Sandoval (Peru). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			20.	The SBSTA and the SBI continued their joint work on addressing issues related to agriculture.
			21.	The SBSTA and the SBI welcomed the first in-session workshop under the Koronivia road map on topic 2(a) (Modalities for implementation of the outcomes of the five in-session workshops on issues related to agriculture and other future topics that may arise from this work), held in conjunction with these sessions, and look forward to considering the report on the workshop at SBI 50 and SBSTA 50 (June 2019) as mandated at SBI 48 and SBSTA 48. They also welcomed the submissions from Parties and observers that served as input to the workshop.
			22.	The SBSTA and the SBI welcomed the participation in the workshop of representatives of the constituted bodies under the Convention and observers, including a representative of the Green Climate Fund. They noted with appreciation the work undertaken by these bodies and observers on issues related to agriculture. The SBI and the SBSTA recalled their invitation to representatives of the constituted bodies under the Convention to contribute to the work referred to in paragraph 21 above and invited them to participate in the workshops under the Koronivia road map.
			23.	The SBSTA and the SBI also invited the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, the Adaptation Fund, the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund to contribute to the work referred to in paragraph 21 above and attend the workshops under the Koronivia road map.
			24.	The SBSTA and the SBI reiterated their invitation to Parties and observers to submit via the submission portal, by 6 May 2019, their views on topics 2(b) (Methods and approaches for assessing adaptation, adaptation co-benefits and resilience) and 2(c) (Improved soil carbon, soil health and soil fertility under grassland and cropland as well as integrated systems, including water management), on which workshops will be organized in conjunction with SBI 50 and SBSTA 50.
			25.	The SBSTA and the SBI welcomed the proposal made by New Zealand to host a workshop related to the Koronivia road map. They agreed to continue consideration of the matter at SBI 50 and SBSTA 50.
			26.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to continue consideration of this agenda item at SBI 50 and SBSTA 50.
	IX.	Impact of the implementation of response measures 
(Agenda item 9)
		A.	Improved forum and work programme
(Agenda sub-item 9(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				27.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it documents FCCC/SB/2018/INF.3 and FCCC/SB/2018/INF.4 as well as the submissions related to the agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 49 agenda sub-item 17(a). The SBSTA also agreed that its Chair and the Chair of the SBI, Mr. Emmanuel Dumisani Dlamini (Eswatini), would convene the 6th meeting of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures as a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Keith Anderson (Switzerland) and Mr. Andrei Marcu (Belize). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				28.	The SBSTA and the SBI convened the 6th meeting of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				29.	The SBSTA and the SBI welcomed the report prepared by the secretariat on the workshop on the use of economic modelling tools related to the areas of the work programme of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures, convened from 30 April to 1 May 2018 in Bonn.
				30.	The SBSTA and the SBI noted the variety of views expressed by Parties and one observer organization in their submissions on the work of the improved forum, including the modalities for its operation, pursuant to the agreed scope of the review of the work programme of the improved forum.
				31.	The SBSTA and the SBI considered the synthesis report on the work of the improved forum prepared by the secretariat on the basis of the submissions referred to in paragraph 30 above and took note of the discussions that took place at the one-day in-session review of the work of the improved forum.
				32.	The SBSTA and the SBI took note of the range of views expressed during the review of the work of the improved forum and recommended that they could be considered in developing the functions, work programme and modalities of the forum that will serve the Paris Agreement:
					(a)	Continuing to use the modalities of inviting submissions from Parties and non-Party stakeholders, preparing synthesis reports and technical papers, and organizing workshops, including regional ones;
					(b)	Collaborating with external experts, international organizations and the private sector and engaging with vulnerable groups and indigenous peoples;
					(c)	Undertaking technical work focusing on different sectors, including transportation, energy, agriculture and tourism;
					(d)	Assessing and analysing the impact of the implementation of response measures;
					(e)	Impacts of the implementation of response measures on economic development in relation to international trade, employment, just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs, and economic diversification and transformation;
					(f)	Establishing a permanent governance structure through a technical expert group;
					(g)	A focused and effective work programme comprising the two areas identified in decision 11/CP.21, paragraph 5, namely economic diversification and transformation, and just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs;
					(h)	Ensuring that the forum welcomes and includes all Parties, encouraging participation by all, and is thus convened in conjunction with the sessions of the subsidiary bodies.
				33.	The SBSTA and the SBI concluded the review of the work of the improved forum. They recommended draft conclusions on the matter for consideration and adoption at COP 24.
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures 
(Agenda sub-item 9(b))
			34.	The SBSTA considered this PAWP-related agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at the second part of its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the agenda sub-item would be considered together with the equally titled SBI 49 agenda sub-item 17(b) and that it would establish a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Anderson and Mr. Marcu. At the second part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP-related items on its agenda, including this one, as presented in paragraph 44 below.
		C.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 9(c))
			35.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to the Chair’s proposal that substantive discussions under this sub-item be held in the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures jointly with those under agenda sub-item 9(a). At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the Chair informed the SBSTA that no specific conclusions had been reached on the matter. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of the matter at SBSTA 50.
		X.	Methodological issues under the Convention: emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport
(Agenda item 10)
			36.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and the first part of its 3rd meeting. It had before it the submissions from ICAO and IMO related to the agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Luiz de Andrade Filho (Brazil) and Mr. Bert van Loon (Belgium). A statement was made by a representative of one Party.
			37.	At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA noted that Parties had not been able to agree on conclusions; in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the item will be on the provisional agenda for the next session (June 2019).
	XI.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 11)
		A.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 11(a))
		B.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda sub-item 11(b))
		C.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 11(c))
			38.	The SBSTA considered these agenda sub-items at its 1st meeting and the second part of its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider these sub-items in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Kelley Kizzier (Ireland) and Mr. Muslim Anshari Rahman (Singapore). At the second part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP-related items on its agenda, including on these matters, as presented in paragraph 44 below.
	XII.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 12)
		39.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and the second part of its 3rd meeting. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the agenda item in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Delphine Eyraud (France) and Mr. Seyni Nafo (Mali). At the second part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions on all the PAWP-related items on its agenda, including this one, as presented in paragraph 44 below.
	XIII.	Reports on other activities
(Agenda item 13)
		A.	Annual report on the technical review of information reported under the Convention by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention in their biennial reports and national communications
(Agenda sub-item 13(a))
			40.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2018/INF.5.
		B.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 13(b))
			41.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2018/INF.3.
		C.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 13(c))
			42.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2018/INF.4.
	XIV.	Report on matters related to the Paris Agreement work programme under agenda items 3, 5(a), 9(b), 11 and 12 
(Agenda items 3, 5(a), 9(b), 11 and 12)
		1.	Proceedings
			43.	At the second part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below on the PAWP-related items on its agenda – 3, 5(a), 9(b), 11 and 12 – which were, mutatis mutandis, identical to the conclusions adopted by the SBI and the APA on the PAWP.
		2.	Conclusions
			44.	Pursuant to the requests of the COP, the SBSTA agreed to forward the proposals by its Chair for the outcomes of its work on the PAWP. The proposals are being forwarded for consideration at COP 24 without prejudice to the content and form of the final outcome of the PAWP and recognizing that further work by the COP is necessary to finalize the PAWP outcome.
	XV.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 14)
		45.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. No other matters were raised under this agenda item.
		XVI.	Closure of and report on the session 
(Agenda item 15)
			1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
				46.	At the first part of the 3rd meeting of the SBSTA, the Deputy Executive Secretary provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during the session, in accordance with the provisions of rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
				47.	Several of the activities resulting from the negotiations at the session call for more support by the secretariat and require additional resources over and above the core budget for the biennium 2018–2019:
					(a)	Under agenda item 4, “Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts”, funding in the amount of EUR 350,000 in 2019 will be required to facilitate the further work of the Task Force on Displacement and the implementation of the further work of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism under its workstream D, on human mobility;
					(b)	Under agenda item 7, “Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform”, funding in the amount of EUR 950,000 will be required in 2019 to support the implementation of the functions of the Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform.
				48.	The Deputy Executive Secretary noted that these amounts were preliminary and based on information available at that time, and that costs for 2020 and beyond will be reviewed in the context of the budget preparation for 2020–2021. He expressed the hope that the secretariat can count on the continuing generosity of Parties in providing funding for activities in a timely and predictable manner. He also noted that without such contributions the secretariat will not be in a position to provide the requested support.
			2.	Closure of and report on the session
				49.	At the first part of its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur to complete the report with the assistance of the secretariat and to make it available to all Parties.
				50.	At the 4th meeting of the SBSTA, which was held jointly with the 4th meeting of the SBI and the 23rd meeting of the APA, the SBSTA Chair, together with the SBI Chair and the APA Co-Chairs, thanked the Government of Poland and the city of Katowice for their hospitality and for providing the facilities and an environment conducive to advancing the negotiations. At the same meeting, statements were made by representatives of 14 Parties, including 12 on behalf of groups of Parties: the African Group; AILAC; AOSIS; the Arab Group; Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; the Environmental Integrity Group; the EU and its member States; the Group of 77 and China; the LDCs; the Like-minded Developing Countries; the Coalition for Rainforest Nations; and the Umbrella Group. Statements were also made on behalf of business and industry NGOs, environmental NGOs, indigenous peoples organizations, research and independent NGOs, trade union NGOs, women and gender NGOs and youth NGOs.
				51.	At the end of the joint plenary, the Chair thanked the Rapporteur, who had exceptionally served for three years, the Vice-Chair, the contact group chairs and facilitators, the Parties and the secretariat for their support, and closed the session.
				
				
				
