|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBSTA/2016/2 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 27 July 2016  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its forty-fourth session, held in Bonn from 16 to 26 May 2016
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session  
		(Agenda item 1)		1–2	4
		II.	Organizational matters 
		(Agenda item 2)		3–6	4
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		3–5	4
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		6	6
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation 
		to climate change 
		(Agenda item 3)		7–21	6
		IV.	Technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the 
		Paris Agreement 
		(Agenda item 4)		22–27	10
		V.	Issues relating to agriculture 
		(Agenda item 5)		28	11
		VI.	Matters relating to science and review 
		(Agenda item 6)		29–48	11
		A.	Research and systematic observation		29–36	11
		B.	Advice on how the assessments of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
				Climate Change can inform the global stocktake referred to in 
				Article 14 of  the Paris Agreement		37–43	13
		C.	The scope of the next periodic review of the long-term global goal 
				under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it		44–48	14
		
			Paragraphs	Page
		VII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures  
		(Agenda item 7)		49–62	14
		A.	Improved forum and work programme		49–57	14
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of 
				the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures		58–61	16
		C.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol		62	16
		VIII.	Methodological issues under the Convention
		(Agenda item 8)		63–76	16
		A.	Greenhouse gas data interface		63	16
		B.	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of 
				greenhouse gases		64–67	17
		C.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime 
				transport		68–70	17
		D.	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of 
				greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I 
				to the Convention		71–76	18
		IX.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol
		(Agenda item 9)		77–89	19
		A.	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 
				and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development 
				mechanism		77–81	19
			B.	Implications of the choice of metrics used to calculate the carbon 
				dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases listed in Annex A to the 
				Kyoto Protocol		82–85	19
		C.	Implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest 
				in exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development 
				mechanism project activities		86–89	20
		X.	Market and non-market mechanisms under the Convention  
		(Agenda item 10)		90–92	21
		A.	Framework for various approaches		90–92	21
		B.	Non-market-based approaches		90–92	21
		C.	New market-based mechanism		90–92	21
		XI.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement  
		(Agenda item 11)		93–104	21
		A.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, 
				paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement		93–96	21
		B.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established 
				by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement		97–100	22
		C.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches 
				referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement		101–104	22
		
			Paragraphs	Page
		XII.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized 
		through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, 
		of the Paris Agreement 
		(Agenda item 12)		105–111	23
		XIII.	Cooperation with other international organizations  
		(Agenda item 13)		112–113	24
		XIV.	Other matters  
		(Agenda item 14)		114–116	24
		XV.	Closure of and report on the session  
		(Agenda item 15)		117–125	25
		Annexes
		I.	Work programme on the improved forum on the impact of the 
		implementation of response measures (June 2016 to November 2018)		27
		II.	Terms of reference of the ad hoc technical expert groups on the impact of the 
		implementation of response measures		29
	I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)
		1.	The forty-fourth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held at the World Conference Center Bonn, in Bonn, Germany, from 16 to 26 May 2016.
		2.	The Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize), opened the session on Monday, 16 May, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Mr. Tibor Schaffhauser (Hungary) as Vice-Chair of the SBSTA and Mr. Aderito Manuel Fernandes Santana (Sao Tome and Principe) as Rapporteur. Ms. Laurence Tubiana (France) made a statement on behalf of the Presidency of the Conference of the Parties (COP).
	II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
			3.	At its 1st meeting, on 16 May, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBSTA/2016/1).
			4.	At the same meeting, the SBSTA adopted its agenda, as amended at that meeting, as follows:
			1.	Opening of the session.
			2.	Organizational matters:
				(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
				(b)	Organization of the work of the session.
			3.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change.
			4.	Technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
			5.	Issues relating to agriculture.
			6.	Matters relating to science and review:
				(a)	Research and systematic observation;
					(b)	Advice on how the assessments of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change can inform the global stocktake referred to in Article 14 of the Paris Agreement;
					(c)	The scope of the next periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it.
			7.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
				(a)	Improved forum and work programme;
					(b)	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures;
				(c)	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol.
			8.	Methodological issues under the Convention:
				(a)	Greenhouse gas data interface;
					(b)	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases;
					(c)	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport;
					(d)	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention.
			9.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol:
				(a)	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development mechanism;
				(b)	Implications of the choice of metrics used to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases listed in Annex A to the Kyoto Protocol;
				(c)	Implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest in exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development mechanism project activities.
			10.	Market and non-market mechanisms under the Convention:
				(a)	Framework for various approaches;
				(b)	Non-market-based approaches;
				(c)	New market-based mechanism.
			11.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement:
				(a)	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement;
				(b)	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement;
				(c)	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement.
				12.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized 
through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the 
	Paris Agreement.
			13.	Cooperation with other international organizations.
			14.	Other matters.
			15.	Closure of and report on the session.
				5.	At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed that statements would be made following the adoption of the agenda and the launch of work. At the resumed 1st meeting, on 17 and 26 May, statements were provided by representatives of 15 Parties, including on behalf of the African Group, the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty, the Coalition for Rainforest Nations, the Group of 77 and China (G77 and China), the Environmental Integrity Group (EIG), the European Union (EU), the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean (AILAC), the Umbrella Group and another group of Parties. Statements were also made by representatives of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) and the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), as well as by representatives of environmental non-governmental organizations, research and independent non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and indigenous peoples organizations.
		B.	Organization of the work of the session 
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			6.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, at which the Chair drew attention to the proposed programme of work posted on the SBSTA 44 web page. In line with previously adopted conclusions of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices, the Chair informed the SBSTA that he would apply firm time management measures in order to enhance the efficiency, timeliness and transparency of work. The Chair also drew the attention of the delegates to the deadline for concluding the work of all groups by 6 p.m. on 24 May, which was aimed at ensuring the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to proceed on this basis.
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change
(Agenda item 3)
			1.	Proceedings
				7.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and at its 2nd meeting, on 26 May. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2016/INF.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2016/INF.4. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Julio Cordano (Chile) and Ms. Beth Lavender (Canada). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				8.	The SBSTA welcomed the following documents prepared for the session:
					(a)	The report on progress made in implementing activities under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change (NWP);
					(b)	The information note on activities undertaken by regional centres and networks on adaptation planning processes, and processes and structures for linking national and local adaptation planning.
				9.	The SBSTA also welcomed the compilation of good practices, tools and data collection initiatives in relation to the use of local, indigenous and traditional knowledge and practices for adaptation, undertaken in collaboration with the Adaptation Committee (AC) and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG).
				10.	The SBSTA acknowledged the contributions of regional centres and networks, international institutions and NWP partner organizations in undertaking and reporting activities on adaptation planning and processes, and in producing information on the outcomes of their regional activities referred to in paragraph 8(b) above. It also acknowledged the inputs of NWP partner organizations, experts and other relevant organizations to the compilation referred to in paragraph 9 above.
				11.	It expressed its appreciation to Japan for providing financial support for the implementation of activities under the NWP.
				12.	In accordance with the mandate in decision 17/CP.19, the SBSTA took stock of progress in the implementation of the NWP and acknowledged the achievements and progress made under the NWP to date. The SBSTA welcomed the efforts of the secretariat in implementing activities under the NWP under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA.
				13.	The SBSTA recognized the role of the NWP in providing support in the areas of adaptation knowledge and related stakeholder engagement to other workstreams and constituted bodies under the Convention and noted the potential role it can play in new processes under the Paris Agreement and decision 1/CP.21. In this regard, the SBSTA invited the AC, the LEG and other relevant bodies, in accordance with their mandates and functions, to consider providing recommendations for activities to be undertaken under the NWP in supporting these processes.
				14.	The SBSTA concluded that activities under the NWP should integrate the consideration of vulnerable communities in addition to gender issues, traditional knowledge, knowledge of indigenous peoples and local knowledge systems, and the role of and impacts on ecosystems, where appropriate.
				15.	The SBSTA also concluded that the following activities would be undertaken to inform adaptation planning and actions at the regional, national and subnational levels, particularly in relation to, inter alia, ecosystems, human settlements, water resources and health:
					(a)	On health:
						(i)	The SBSTA invited Parties, NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations to submit, by 29 August 2016, information on: their recent work in the area of climate impacts on human health, including changes in the geographical distribution of diseases; new and emerging health issues, including tropical diseases and their impacts on social and economic structures, as well as the issues of malnutrition, waterborne diseases, vector-borne diseases and disaster impacts; and the effects of climate change on health and productivity in the workplace, with implications for occupational health, safety and social protection;
						(ii)	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to utilize the submissions referred to in paragraph 15(a)(i) above to inform the 10th Focal Point Forum, to be held in conjunction with SBSTA 45 (November 2016);
						(iii)	The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to organize the 10th Focal Point Forum on the topic of health and adaptation, featuring speakers from Parties and relevant organizations;
						(iv)	The SBSTA further requested the secretariat to prepare a report synthesizing the submissions referred to in paragraph 15(a)(i) above and the topics discussed at the 10th Focal Point Forum for consideration at SBSTA 46 (May 2017);
					(b)	On human settlements:
						(i)	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare a document concisely summarizing initiatives in the area of human settlements within the context of the mandate of the NWP for consideration at SBSTA 46;
						(ii)	The SBSTA invited Parties, NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations to submit, by 20 September 2017, information on topics such as good practices, lessons learned and available tools and methods, based on their recent work in the area of human settlements and adaptation, including on assessing sensitivity and vulnerability to climate change, integrating both short- and long-term climate considerations (including both extreme and slow onset events) into planning, the role of national governments in supporting adaptation at the local level and city-to-city partnerships on climate change, bearing in mind the unique challenges and scale differences in urban, rural and remote settlements, in particular in small island developing States and the least developed countries; cross-cutting issues and linkages to the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans (NAPs) should also be considered;
						(iii)	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to utilize the submissions referred to in paragraph 15(b)(ii) above to inform the 11th Focal Point Forum, to be held in conjunction with SBSTA 47 (November 2017);
						(iv)	The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to organize the 11th Focal Point Forum around the topic of human settlements and adaptation, featuring speakers from local and municipal governments and Parties and relevant organizations;
						(v)	The SBSTA further requested the secretariat to prepare a report synthesizing the submissions referred to in paragraph 15(b)(ii) above and the topics discussed at the 11th Focal Point Forum for consideration at SBSTA 48 (April–May 2018);
					(c)	On ecosystems and water resources:
						(i)	The SBSTA invited Parties, NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations to submit, by 25 January 2017, information on: lessons learned and good practices in relation to adaptation planning processes that address ecosystems and interrelated areas such as water resources; lessons learned and good practices in monitoring and evaluating the implementation of ecosystem-based adaptation; and tools for assessing the benefits of mitigation and adaptation to enhancing resilience and emission reductions that ecosystem-based adaptation provides;
						(ii)	The SBSTA requested the secretariat, in collaboration with relevant NWP partner organizations, to prepare a report synthesizing the submissions referred to in paragraph 15(c)(i) above for consideration at SBSTA 46;
					(d)	On economic diversification:
						(i)	The SBSTA invited Parties and NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations to submit, by 20 September 2017, information on lessons learned and good practices in relation to adaptation actions and plans that could enhance economic diversification and have mitigation co-benefits;
						(ii)	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to compile all submissions referred to in paragraph 15(d)(i) above into a miscellaneous document for consideration at SBSTA 47.
				16.	The SBSTA welcomed the activities recommended by the AC and the LEG to be undertaken under the NWP, in response to an invitation from the Chair of the SBSTA, and requested the secretariat to undertake those activities under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA. It noted that the activities will strengthen the role of the NWP in providing knowledge support to the work of the AC and the LEG.
				17.	The SBSTA also noted that the activities referred to in paragraph 16 above will strengthen the role of the NWP in supporting the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
				18.	The SBSTA invited NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations, including the IPCC, to submit to the secretariat, by 20 September 2017, information on indicators of adaptation and resilience at the national and/or local level or for specific sectors. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to utilize those submissions to inform the meeting that the AC agreed to convene in 2018 for exchanging views on national adaptation goals and indicators and how they relate to goals and indicators for sustainable development and disaster risk reduction in the context of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030. The SBSTA invited the AC and the LEG to consider the submissions so as to inform their work on reviewing the effectiveness and adequacy of adaptation.
				19.	The SBSTA recognized that there is a role for the NWP in addressing knowledge gaps that are barriers to adaptation actions at the national and subnational levels. It requested the secretariat to foster collaboration among, inter alia, policymakers; research and scientific communities, including the IPCC; practitioners and financial institutions so as to contribute to closing adaptation knowledge gaps at the national and subnational levels.
				20.	The SBSTA considered ways to enhance the effectiveness of the modalities of the NWP, including ways to enhance the dissemination of knowledge generated under the NWP and improve learning to scale up adaptation actions at all levels. It concluded that the following actions, among others, would be carried out under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA and with the support of the secretariat:
					(a)	Strengthening the engagement of existing NWP partner organizations and developing new partnerships, including with local and municipal governments, the private sector, scientific organizations, academia, organizations representing indigenous and traditional communities, spiritual and religious groups, gender constituencies, youth organizations and the mass media;
					(b)	Improving access to and usability of knowledge for end users, including through the adaptation knowledge portal, for example by linking the adaptation knowledge portal with other knowledge platforms, as appropriate;
					(c)	Enhancing the participation of the UNFCCC national focal points in meetings, workshops and other relevant activities under the NWP, and their role in the dissemination of knowledge outputs, generated under the NWP, to countries, including through the adaptation knowledge portal;
					(d)	Engaging regional centres and networks in undertaking knowledge-sharing and training activities and disseminating the outcomes at the regional, national and subnational levels, including the outcomes of the activities referred to in paragraphs 15 and 16 above;
					(e)	Communicating (e.g. via webinar, as appropriate) with NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations on the process to formulate and implement NAPs in collaboration with the AC and the LEG;
					(f)	Improving the consideration of gender issues and the inclusion of traditional knowledge, knowledge of indigenous peoples and local knowledge systems in tools and methods for adaptation planning processes.
				21.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 15, 16 and 18–20 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	IV.	Technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 4)
		1.	Proceedings
			22.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Gabriela Fischerova (Slovakia) and Mr. Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			23.	The SBSTA initiated the elaboration of the technology framework established under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the technology framework), in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 67.
			24.	The SBSTA noted the fruitful exchanges of initial views by Parties on the elaboration of the technology framework.
			25.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare an information note on mapping climate technology development and transfer activities and initiatives under and outside the Convention relevant to the implementation of the Paris Agreement, including on the status of the implementation of the framework for meaningful and effective actions to enhance the implementation of Article 4, paragraph 5, of the Convention, as adopted by decision 4/CP.7 and enhanced by decision 3/CP.13. This would form part of the inputs to the deliberations among Parties on the elaboration of the technology framework at SBSTA 45.
			26.	The SBSTA invited Parties to submit their views by 15 September 2016 on the elaboration of the technology framework, including the content, features and characteristics, the purpose and the themes of the technology framework in order for the secretariat to prepare a compilation of Parties’ submissions for consideration at SBSTA 45.
			27.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBSTA 45 taking into account the information referred to in paragraphs 24–26 above.
	V.	Issues relating to agriculture
(Agenda item 5)
		Proceedings
			28.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2016/MISC.1 and Add.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Emmanuel Dlamini (Swaziland) and Mr. Heikki Granholm (Finland). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA noted that the issue will be included on the agenda of its next session in accordance with Rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
		VI.	Matters relating to science and review
(Agenda item 6)
			A.	Research and systematic observation
(Agenda sub-item 6(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					29.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Ann Gordon (Belize) and Ms. Christiane Textor (Germany). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					30.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the statements delivered by the representatives of GCOS, the IPCC and WCRP.
					31.	The SBSTA took note of the information submitted by Parties for the 8th meeting of the research dialogue, held on 19 May 2016, and on themes for a possible research workshop in conjunction with SBSTA 46. It also noted the information note on the 8th meeting of the research dialogue prepared by the SBSTA Chair and the letter to the SBSTA Chair from the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.
					32.	The SBSTA welcomed the information that the IPCC, in response to an invitation from the COP, will produce a special report in 2018 on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas (GHG) emission pathways. It also welcomed the decision of the IPCC to produce two other special reports – one on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security and GHG fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems and the other on climate change and oceans and the cryosphere – and a methodology report on GHG inventories.
					33.	The SBSTA welcomed the 8th meeting of the research dialogue. It expressed its appreciation to Parties, GCOS, the IPCC, WCRP, the World Meteorological Organization and all participating research programmes and organizations for their contributions. It noted the usefulness of a poster session and invited the SBSTA Chair to continue to use this modality. It requested the SBSTA Chair to produce a summary report on the meeting, to be made available before SBSTA 45.
					34.	The SBSTA noted the importance of addressing regional climate research and data needs. It encouraged relevant research programmes and organizations to present their efforts, including activities they are undertaking such as regional workshops, to identify relevant climate research and data information and gaps at the research dialogue meeting to be held at SBSTA 46.
					35.	The SBSTA invited Parties to submit, by 10 April 2017, their views on possible topics for consideration at the research dialogue to be held at SBSTA 46 and beyond, taking into account the themes and presentations already addressed at previous research dialogue meetings and the themes suggested for future meetings, as identified in annex I to the information note referred to in paragraph 31 above, as well as the encouragement referred to in paragraph 34 above.
					36.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 34 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
				B.	Advice on how the assessments of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change can inform the global stocktake referred to in Article 14 of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 6(b))
					1.	Proceedings
						37.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Nagmeldin Goutbi Elhassan Mahmoud (Sudan) and Mr. Frank McGovern (Ireland). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
					2.	Conclusions
						38.	The SBSTA, in response to the mandate from the COP at its twenty-first session (decision 1/CP.21, para. 100), launched its consideration of advice on how the assessments of the IPCC can inform the global stocktake of the implementation of the Paris Agreement pursuant to its Article 14.
						39.	The SBSTA welcomed the in-session SBSTA–IPCC special event on advice on how the assessments of the IPCC can inform the global stocktake. It acknowledged the rich exchange of information that took place.
						40.	The SBSTA also acknowledged the importance of the outputs of IPCC assessment cycles for the global stocktake, which will contribute to the scientific integrity of the global stocktake. It noted the importance of the effective communication of the results of the work of the IPCC to the UNFCCC, bearing in mind that the type, scope and timing of the IPCC reports is decided by the IPCC. It welcomed the decision of the IPCC to take the outcomes of COP 21 into account when determining the IPCC programme of work and products for the sixth IPCC assessment cycle.
						41.	The SBSTA also welcomed IPCC decisions IPCC/XLIII-6, IPCC/XLIII-7 and IPCC/XLIII-8, enumerating the forthcoming products of the sixth IPCC assessment cycle, including an IPCC Special Report to be produced in 2018 on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related global GHG emission pathways, to be prepared in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty, which will have relevance to the first global stocktake.
						42.	The SBSTA noted that, in relation to advice on how the IPCC assessments can inform the global stocktake, lessons can be learned from past experience. It invited Parties and observer organizations, taking relevant experience into account, to submit, by 
12 September 2016, their views on advice on how the assessments of the IPCC can inform the global stocktake, bearing in mind the time frame of the sixth IPCC assessment cycle.
						43.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBSTA 45, bearing in mind the relevant work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Paris Agreement (APA) on the global stocktake.
				C.	The scope of the next periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it
(Agenda sub-item 6(c))
					1.	Proceedings
						44.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with SBI agenda item 15 in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Leon Charles (Grenada) and Ms. Gertraud Wollansky (Austria). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
					2.	Conclusions
						45.	The SBSTA and the SBI recalled that they had been requested at COP 21 to consider the scope of the next periodic review with a view to forwarding a recommendation for consideration by the COP by no later than 2018, as appropriate.
						46.	They also recalled that the COP, at the same session, had agreed that the next periodic review should be conducted in an effective and efficient manner, avoid duplication of work and take into account the results of relevant work conducted under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol and the subsidiary bodies. In that regard, the SBSTA and the SBI noted the relevant work on the global stocktake under the APA, the facilitative dialogue, which will take place in 2018, and the technical examination processes.
						47.	In the light of the mandate referred to in paragraphs 45 and 46 above, the SBSTA and the SBI agreed to further consider the scope of the next periodic review at their forty-sixth sessions and to refine it, taking into account relevant experiences with the 
2013–2015 review.
						48.	The SBSTA and the SBI noted that an in-session workshop on the scope of the next periodic review could be useful and that they may consider the matter further at their forty-sixth sessions.
	VII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures 
(Agenda item 7)
		A.	Improved forum and work programme
(Agenda sub-item 7(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				49.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at its 4th meeting on 26 May. It had before it documents FCCC/TP/2016/3 and FCCC/TP/2016/4. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with SBI agenda sub-item 14(a) in a contact group co-chaired by the Chair of the SBSTA and the Chair of the SBI, Mr. Tomasz Chruszczow (Poland), assisted by Ms. Natalya Kushko (Ukraine) and Mr. Andrei Marcu (Panama). The SBSTA also agreed to consider this agenda sub-item at this session jointly with SBSTA agenda sub-item 7(c). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				50.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the technical paper prepared by the secretariat to assist developing country Parties in assessing the impact of the implementation of response measures, including the use of modelling tools, and the technical paper to assist developing country Parties in their economic diversification initiatives. The SBI and the SBSTA encouraged developing country Parties to use these technical papers as guidance in their assessment of the impact of the implementation of response measures and their economic diversification initiatives. The SBI and the SBSTA noted that Parties considered the information contained in these technical papers for the purposes of advancing their work on the work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				51.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed the offer by a Gulf Cooperation Council country to host a workshop to enhance work under the improved forum.
				52.	The SBI and the SBSTA noted the interest of some Parties in a high-level event on economic diversification and sustainable development to be held at COP 22.
				53.	The SBI and the SBSTA convened the first meeting of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures in accordance with decision 11/CP.21 and agreed to implement the work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures as contained in annex I, under the guidance of the Chairs of the SBI and the SBSTA.
				54.	The SBI and the SBSTA also agreed that in order to advance the work of the improved forum, the ad hoc technical expert groups shall function in accordance with the terms of reference contained in annex II.
				55.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat to support, under the guidance of the Chairs of the SBI and the SBSTA, the implementation of the work programme, including the activities of the ad hoc technical expert groups.
				56.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the actions to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 53–55 above.
				57.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures 
(Agenda item 7(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				58.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 4th meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with SBSTA agenda sub-item 7(a) and SBI agenda sub-item 14(a) in a contact group. At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				59.	The SBI and the SBSTA initiated their consideration of the modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures, in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 34.
				60.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties and observer organizations to submit, by 12 September 2016, their views on the modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				61.	They agreed to continue their consideration of this matter at their forty-fifth sessions taking into consideration the submissions referred to in paragraph 60 above.
		C.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 7(c))
			Proceedings
				62.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 4th meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item jointly with SBSTA agenda sub-item 7(a) and SBI agenda sub-item 14(a). At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA and the Chair of the SBI would undertake consultations with interested Parties on how to take up this agenda sub-item in future sessions of the SBSTA. At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA agreed to continue consideration of how to take up this agenda sub-item at SBSTA 45.
		VIII.	Methodological issues under the Convention 
(Agenda item 8)
			A.	Greenhouse gas data interface
(Agenda sub-item 8(a))
				Proceedings
					63.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations facilitated by Ms. Elsa Hatanaka (Japan). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA noted that the issue will be included on the agenda of its next session in accordance with Rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
			B.	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases
(Agenda sub-item 8(b))
				1.	Proceedings
					64.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Takeshi Enoki (Japan) and Mr. Washington Zhakata (Zimbabwe). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					65.	The SBSTA continued its consideration of the common metrics used to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of anthropogenic GHG emissions by sources and removals by sinks (hereinafter referred to as common metrics) within the framework of methodological issues under the Convention.
					66.	The SBSTA acknowledged the relevance of common metrics to climate change policy. It noted that the COP requested the APA to elaborate guidance for accounting for Parties’ nationally determined contributions which ensures that accounting is in accordance with common metrics assessed by the IPCC.
					67.	Therefore, the SBSTA agreed to defer its consideration of common metrics to SBSTA 46 so as to be able to take into account deliberations under the APA on the guidance referred to in decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 31.
			C.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport
(Agenda sub-item 8(c))
				1.	Proceedings
					68.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2016/MISC.2. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting, where the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					69.	The SBSTA took note of the information received from and progress reported by the secretariats of ICAO and IMO on their ongoing work on addressing emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport, and noted the views expressed by Parties on this information.
					70.	The SBSTA invited the secretariats of ICAO and IMO to continue to report, at future sessions of the SBSTA, on relevant work on this issue.
			D.	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 8(d))
				1.	Proceedings
					71.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting, where the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					72.	The SBSTA initiated its consideration of the results of the training programme for review experts for the technical review of GHG inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties), as agreed at SBSTA 41.
					73.	The SBSTA acknowledged the relevance of the training programme in contributing to the quality and consistency of the technical reviews of GHG inventories of Annex I Parties and recognized the importance of further developing and enhancing the training programme, taking into account its importance with respect to the future adoption of the common modalities, procedures and guidelines for the transparency of action and support under the Paris Agreement.
					74.	The SBSTA noted that the implementation of the training programme started in September 2015 and that no experience has yet been gained in technical reviews of GHG inventories of Annex I Parties using the “Guidelines for the technical review of information reported under the Convention related to greenhouse gas inventories, biennial reports and national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention” by experts who undertook the training programme. Therefore, the SBSTA recognized that not enough information is yet available to enable it to assess the results in order to conduct a comprehensive and meaningful analysis with a view to further developing and enhancing the training programme.
					75.	The SBSTA agreed to consider the assessment of the results of the training programme at SBSTA 46 with a view to making recommendations to COP 23 (November 2017) on the further development and enhancement of the training programme.
					76.	The SBSTA further agreed to extend the implementation of the ongoing training programme to 2017.
		IX.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol 
(Agenda item 9)
			A.	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development mechanism
(Agenda sub-item 9(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					77.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 2nd meeting. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to take up this sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Maya Hunt (New Zealand) and Mr. José Antonio Prado (Chile). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					78.	The SBSTA continued its consideration of the work programmes referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraphs 5–7 and 10.
					79.	The SBSTA acknowledged with appreciation the rich exchange of views by Parties that took place during the in-session workshop on revegetation activities and requested the secretariat to prepare a report on the workshop for consideration at SBSTA 45.
					80.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of the work programme referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraph 6, at SBSTA 45 with a view to recommending a draft decision on the matter for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) at its twelfth session (November 2016), as reflected in document FCCC/SBSTA/2016/CRP.1.
					81.	The SBSTA also agreed to continue its consideration of the work programmes referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraphs 5, 7 and 10, at SBSTA 45 with a view to recommending a draft decision or reporting on the outcomes, for consideration and, as appropriate, adoption at CMP 12.
			B.	Implications of the choice of metrics used to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases listed in Annex A to the Kyoto Protocol 
(Agenda sub-item 9(b))
				1.	Proceedings
					82.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Enoki and Mr. Zhakata. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					83.	The SBSTA continued its assessment of the implications of the choice of metrics used to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of the GHGs listed in Annex A to the Kyoto Protocol for the third or subsequent commitment periods, as requested by decision 4/CMP.7, paragraphs 10 and 11.
					84.	The SBSTA acknowledged that the assessment of the implications of the choice of metrics is an important process that is linked to and dependent on consideration by Parties of a third commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol.
					85.	The SBSTA agreed to defer its assessment of the matter and would only return to it if the CMP initiates a consideration of a third commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol.
			C.	Implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest in exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development mechanism project activities
				1.	Proceedings
					86.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations facilitated by Mr. Eduardo Sanhueza (Chile). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					87.	The SBSTA continued its consideration of the implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest in exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development mechanism project activities.
					88.	The SBSTA noted the information collected through submissions from Parties in the course of the consideration of this agenda sub-item, as contained in documents FCCC/SBSTA/2011/MISC.12, FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.15, FCCC/SBSTA/2012/MISC.10 and FCCC/SBSTA/2014/CRP.2.
					89.	The SBSTA agreed that the consideration of this matter would continue at SBSTA 46.
		X.	Market and non-market mechanisms under the Convention 
(Agenda item 10)
			A.	Framework for various approaches 
(Agenda sub-item 10(a))
			B.	Non-market-based approaches
(Agenda sub-item 10(b))
				C.	New market-based mechanism
(Agenda sub-item 10(c))
					1.	Proceedings
						90.	The SBSTA considered agenda sub-items 10(a–c) at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 2nd meeting. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting, where the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
					2.	Conclusions
						91.	The SBSTA took note of the work undertaken in response to the mandates arising from decision 1/CP.18, paragraphs 44, 47 and 50, including the information collected through submissions from Parties and the related technical papers and workshop reports.
						92.	The SBSTA agreed to conduct its next consideration of these issues at SBSTA 50 (June 2019).
	XI.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 11)
		A.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 11(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				93.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 2nd meeting. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Kelley Kizzier (EU) and Mr. Hugh Sealy (Maldives). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				94.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 36, initiated the process related to the guidance referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement.
				95.	The SBSTA noted that Parties engaged in a productive initial exchange of views on Article 6, paragraphs 2 and 3, of the Paris Agreement and decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 36, throughout this session and agreed to focus on establishing a common understanding at SBSTA 45 of the matters related to the guidance referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement.
				96.	The SBSTA invited Parties and observer organizations to submit, by 30 September 2016, their views on the guidance referred to in paragraph 94 above.
		B.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda sub-item 11(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				97.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 2nd meeting. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Kizzier and Mr. Sealy. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				98.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 37 and 38, initiated the process related to the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
				99.	The SBSTA noted that Parties engaged in a productive initial exchange of views on Article 6, paragraphs 4, 5, 6 and 7, of the Paris Agreement and decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 37 and 38, throughout this session and agreed to focus on establishing common understanding at SBSTA 45 of the matters related to the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
				100.	The SBSTA invited Parties and observer organizations to submit, by 30 September 2016, their views on the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism referred to in paragraph 98 above.
		C.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 11(c))
			1.	Proceedings
				101.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 2nd meeting. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Kizzier and Mr. Sealy. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				102.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 39 and 40, initiated the process related to the work programme under the framework for non-market approaches to sustainable development referred to in Article 6, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement.
				103.	The SBSTA noted that Parties engaged in a productive initial exchange of views on Article 6, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Paris Agreement and decision 1.CP.21, paragraphs 39 and 40, throughout this session and agreed to focus on establishing a common understanding at SBSTA 45 of the matters related to the work programme referred to in decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 39 and 40.
				104.	The SBSTA invited Parties and observer organizations to submit, by 30 September 2016, their views on the work programme referred to in paragraph 102 above.
	XII.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 12)
		1.	Proceedings
			105.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Rafael Da Soler (Brazil) and Ms. Outi Honkatukia (Finland). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			106.	The SBSTA initiated its consideration of the development of modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement, as requested at COP 21.
			107.	The SBSTA invited Parties and observer organizations to submit their views on the development of modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement by 29 August 2016 for compilation into a miscellaneous document. In doing so, Parties and observer organizations may wish to consider, inter alia:
				(a)	What are the existing modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions, and what are the challenges and information gaps with respect to these existing modalities;
				(b)	What accounting modalities need to be developed to serve the Paris Agreement, in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Agreement, and what are the challenges to the development of these accounting modalities and how can these be addressed;
				(c)	How to ensure that accounting modalities are developed in time to be integrated into the transparency framework established under the Paris Agreement.
			108.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize an in-session workshop in conjunction with SBSTA 45 to inform the work of the SBSTA on this matter, drawing on the submissions referred to in paragraph 107 above and on the relevant findings of bodies under the Convention.
			109.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBSTA 45.
			110.	The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to prepare a technical paper, prior to SBSTA 46, summarizing information from the in-session workshop referred to in paragraph 108 above and submissions.
			111.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 108 and 110 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	XIII.	Cooperation with other international organizations 
(Agenda item 13)
		1.	Proceedings
			112.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting and at its 2nd meeting. At its resumed 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting, where the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusion below.
		2.	Conclusion
			113.	The SBSTA took note of document FCCC/SBSTA/2016/INF.3 containing the summary of the secretariat’s cooperative activities with other intergovernmental organizations.
		XIV.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 14)
			Proceedings
				114.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its resumed 1st meeting.
				115.	The SBSTA took note of a synthesis report on the technical assessment process for proposed forest reference emission levels and/or forest reference levels submitted by developing country Parties prepared for the session, and the recommendations contained therein.
				116.	No other matters were raised under this agenda item.
		XV.	Closure of and report on the session 
(Agenda item 15)
			1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
				117.	At the 2nd and 4th meetings of the SBSTA, a representative of the secretariat provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during the session in accordance with the provisions of Rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
				118.	She informed the SBSTA that there were a number of activities coming out of negotiations at the session that call for more support by the secretariat and, therefore, require additional resources over and above the approved core budget for the biennium 2016–2017. These comprise:
					(a)	Under agenda item 3, “Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change”, funding in the amount of EUR 455,000 will be required to cover the cost of supporting the implementation of the Nairobi work programme;
					(b)	Under agenda item 6(a), “Research and systematic observation”, the activity of holding a poster session at the 9th meeting of the research dialogue has a financial implication but the cost will be absorbed by existing resources;
					(c)	Under agenda item 7(a), “Impact of the implementation of response measures: Improved forum and work programme”, funding in the amount of EUR 225,000 will be required to operationalize the work programme. Activities of this nature have been included in the recent call for contributions to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities. For the information of Parties, the same costs are also stated under SBI agenda item 14(a);
					(d)	Under agenda item 12, “Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement”, the cost of five experts to support an in-session workshop in conjunction with SBSTA 45 will be absorbed by existing resources.
				119.	She added that the above amounts were preliminary and based on the current available information. She noted that overall additional supplementary funds amounting to EUR 680,000 will be needed to cover the costs of the mandated activities.
				120.	She also noted that some of the conclusions adopted by the SBSTA at its current session will have budgetary implications beyond 2017. With regard to the resource requirements for 2018–2019, she informed the SBSTA that they will be reviewed in the context of established budgetary procedures.
			2.	Closure of and report on the session
				121.	At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session and to make it available to all Parties. At the same meeting, closing statements were made by representatives of seven Parties, including on behalf of the African Group, AOSIS, EIG, the G77 and China, AILAC, the least developed countries (LDCs) and the Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of business and industry NGOs, environmental NGOs, farmers NGOs, indigenous peoples organizations, women and gender NGOs and youth NGOs.
				122.	At its 3rd meeting, on 26 May, the SBSTA convened a meeting jointly with the SBI and the APA to bid farewell to Ms. Christiana Figueres, the outgoing Executive Secretary of the UNFCCC. Representatives of the current and incoming Presidencies of the COP, the presiding officers of the three subsidiary bodies as well as Ms. Patricia Espinosa, Executive Secretary designate, thanked her for the services provided during her time in office.
				123.	Ms. Figueres recalled her first address to Parties in 2010, in which she invited all governments to rise to the challenge posed by the scale and urgency of the threat of climate change, and the subsequent six years characterized by the tireless efforts Parties made to respond to climate change. She thanked Parties for their hard work, national aspirations, cooperation with one another and collective ambition. She underlined the crucial role played by non-Party actors and civil society, and thanked subnational governments, corporations, financial institutions and civil society at large for their support of the climate change process. Ms. Figueres further expressed her appreciation to the United Nations organizations and extended her deeply felt gratitude to the staff of the UNFCCC secretariat for their unwavering commitment, tireless dedication and collective wisdom.
				124.	Fourteen Parties made statements, including on behalf of the African Group, AILAC, AOSIS, the Caribbean Community, the EIG, the EU, the G77 and China, the LDCs and the Umbrella Group.
				125.	At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions on agenda item 7. A statement was made by the representative of one Party. Following this, the Chair thanked all Parties, facilitators and the secretariat’s SBSTA team for their support and closed the session.
				

Annex I
	Work programme on the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures (June 2016 to November 2018)
		| Before/during SBI 45 and SBSTA 45 (November 2016) |
		| Elements | Estimated timeline/deliverable |
		| Technical paper on just transition of the workforce, and the creation of decent work and quality jobs | By SBI 45 and SBSTA 45 Technical paper |
		| Views and experiences, including on case studies, taking into account decision 11/CP.21, paragraphs 1 and 6, in the context of sustainable development, in order to implement the work of the improved forum, on: (1) Economic diversification and transformation;
(2) Just transition of the workforce, and the creation of decent work and quality jobs | By SBI 45 and SBSTA 45 Submissions from Parties and organizations |
		| Workshop on views and experiences, including on case studies, taking into account decision 11/CP.21, paragraphs 1 and 6, in the context of sustainable development, in order to implement the work of the improved forum on: (1) Economic diversification and transformation;
(2) Just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs | Before SBI 45 and SBSTA 45 Report on the workshop |
		| In-forum discussion on the workshop, including, as appropriate, to provide a venue for Parties to raise priority areas, and, as appropriate, constituting an ad hoc technical expert group | During SBI 45 and SBSTA 45 Conclusions of the forum |
		
		
		
		
		| Before/during SBI 46 and SBSTA 46 (May 2017) |
		| Elements | Estimated timeline/deliverable |
		| Work of ad hoc technical expert group, as appropriate | During SBI 46 and SBSTA 46 Report of the ad hoc technical expert group, as appropriate |
		| In-forum discussion on the meeting of the ad hoc technical expert group, as appropriate | Not applicable |
		| Parties’ discussion of recommendation to COP 23 (November 2017) | Possible draft recommendation to be forwarded for consideration at COP 23 |
		
		
		| Before/during SBI 47 and SBSTA 47 (November 2017) |
		| Elements | Estimated timeline/deliverable |
		| In-forum discussion on possible needs for modelling tools, including capacity-building opportunities, related to the work programme on the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures In-forum discussion on the areas of the work programme | During SBI 47 and SBSTA 47  Conclusions of the forum |
		
		
		| Before/during SBI 48 and SBSTA 48 (April–May 2018) |
		| Elements | Estimated timeline/deliverable |
		| In-forum training workshop on use of economic modelling tools related to the work programme on the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures | Report on the in-forum training workshop |
		
		
		| Before/during SBI 49 and SBSTA 49 (November 2018) |
		| Elements | Estimated timeline/deliverable |
		| Review of the work of the improved forum | Draft conclusions/decisions |
		
			Abbreviations: COP = Conference of the Parties, SBI = Subsidiary Body for Implementation,
SBSTA = Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice.
		
Annex II
	Terms of reference of the ad hoc technical expert groups on the impact of the implementation of response measures
		1.	Pursuant to decision 11/CP.21, paragraph 4, the subsidiary bodies may constitute ad hoc technical expert groups (TEGs) to elaborate on the technical work under the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures. A TEG is to make findings that will assist the improved forum in making recommendations.
		2.	A TEG shall have regional balance in line with decision 11/CP.21, paragraph 4, and will take into account the goal of gender balance in line with decision 23/CP.18.
		3.	A TEG shall be composed of:
			(a)	Twelve experts with two members from each of the five regional groups of the United Nations, and one member each from the small island developing States and the least developed countries;
			(b)	Two experts from intergovernmental organizations with experience in the relevant technical area.
		4.	The participating experts shall serve in their independent expert capacity.
		5.	An ad hoc TEG meets in session in conjunction with the meetings of the forum, unless otherwise decided by Parties.
		6.	Technical experts will need to have relevant qualifications and expertise in scientific, technical and socioeconomic fields related to the areas of the work programme on the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures. Parties will determine what expertise is required for a TEG.
		7.	The members of a TEG shall be nominated and approved by Parties.
		8.	The co-chairs of a TEG shall be nominated and approved by Parties with one co-chair nominated by developing country Parties and one co-chair nominated by developed country Parties.
		9.	Meetings are open to attendance by accredited observer organizations and observers from Parties.
		10.	The secretariat shall support the activities of a TEG, including facilitating the organization of meetings and preparing background materials and workshop/meeting reports, as requested by the TEG, and as appropriate.
		
			
			
			
	
