|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBSTA/2016/4 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 31 January 2017  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its forty-fifth session,
held in Marrakech from 7 to 15 November 2016
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session 
		(Agenda item 1)		1–2	4
		II.	Organizational matters 
		(Agenda item 2)		3–8	4
		A.	Adoption of the agenda 		3–5	4
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		6	6
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair		7–8	6
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to 
		climate change 
		(Agenda item 3)		9–19	7
		IV.	Report of the Adaptation Committee 
		(Agenda item 4)		20	9
		V.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism 
		for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts 
		(Agenda item 5)		21	9
		VI.	Development and transfer of technologies
		(Agenda item 6)		22–31	10
		A.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the 
				Climate Technology Centre and Network		22	10
		B.	Technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the 
				Paris Agreement 		23–31	10
		VII.	Issues relating to agriculture 
		(Agenda item 7)		32–36	11
		VIII.	Matters relating to science and review
		(Agenda item 8)		37–56	12
			Paragraphs	Page
		A.	Research and systematic observation		37–46	12
		B.	Advice on how the assessments of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
				Climate Change can inform the global stocktake referred to 
				in Article 14 of the Paris Agreement		47–56	13
		IX.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
		(Agenda item 9)		57–69	15
		A.	Improved forum and work programme		57–65	15
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement
				of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures	66–68	16
		C.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol		69	17
		X.	Methodological issues under the Convention
 		(Agenda item 10)		70–73	17
		A.	Greenhouse gas data interface		70	17
		B.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport	71–73	17
		XI.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol
		(Agenda item 11)		74–80	18
		A.	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, 
				of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development mechanism		74–77	18
		B.	Carbon dioxide capture and storage in geological formations as 
				clean development mechanism project activities		78–80	18
		XII.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement
		(Agenda item 12)		81–104	19
		A.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, 
				of the Paris Agreement		81–88	19
		B.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by 
				Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement		89–96	20
		C.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches 
				referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement		97–104	21
		XIII.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized
		through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, 
		of the Paris Agreement 
		(Agenda item 13)		105–112	22
		XIV.	Reports on other activities
		(Agenda item 14)		113–115	23
		A.	Annual report on the technical review of information reported 
				under the Convention by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
				in their biennial reports and national communications		113	23
		B.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories 
				of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		114	23
		C.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories 
				and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, 
				as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol		115	23
			Paragraphs	Page
		XV.	Other matters 
		(Agenda item 15)		116	24
		XVI.	Closure of and report on the session 
		(Agenda item 16)		117–121	24
		
			
	I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)
		1.	The forty-fifth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held in Bab Ighli, Marrakech, Morocco, from 7 to 15 November 2016.
		2.	The Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize), opened the session on Monday, 7 November, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Mr. Tibor Schaffhauser (Hungary) as Vice-Chair of the SBSTA and Mr. Aderito Manuel Fernandes Santana (Sao Tome and Principe) as Rapporteur.
	II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
			3.	At its 1st meeting, on 7 November, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBSTA/2016/3).
			4.	At the same meeting, the agenda was adopted as follows:
			1.	Opening of the session.
			2.	Organizational matters:
				(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
				(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
				(c)	Election of officers other than the Chair.
				3.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change.
				4.	Report of the Adaptation Committee.
				5.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.
			6.	Development and transfer of technologies:
				(a)	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network;
				(b)	Technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
			7.	Issues relating to agriculture.
			8.	Matters relating to science and review:
				(a)	Research and systematic observation;
					(b)	Advice on how the assessments of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change can inform the global stocktake referred to in Article 14 of the Paris Agreement.
					
			9.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
				(a)	Improved forum and work programme;
					(b)	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures;
				(c)	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol.
			10.	Methodological issues under the Convention:
				(a)	Greenhouse gas data interface;
					(b)	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport.
			11.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol:
				(a)	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development mechanism;
				(b)	Carbon dioxide capture and storage in geological formations as clean development mechanism project activities.
			12.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement:
				(a)	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement;
				(b)	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement;
				(c)	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement.
				13.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement.
			14.	Reports on other activities:
				(a)	Annual report on the technical review of information reported under the Convention by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention in their biennial reports and national communications;
				(b)	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(c)	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol.
			15.	Other matters.
			16.	Closure of and report on the session.
			
				5.	At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed that statements would be made following the adoption of the agenda and the launch of work. At the 1st and 2nd meetings, on 7 November, statements were made by representatives of 17 Parties, including on behalf of the African Group, the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), the Arab Group, the Central American Integration System, the Coalition for Rainforest Nations, the Environmental Integrity Group (EIG), the European Union (EU) and its member States, the Group of 77 and China (G77 and China), the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean (AILAC), the least developed countries (LDCs), the Umbrella Group, and another group of Parties. Statements were also made by representatives of the Technology Executive Committee, the Advisory Board of the Climate Technology Centre and Network, the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) and the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS), the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the United National Office for Outer Space Affairs and the United Nations Environment Programme.
		B.	Organization of the work of the session 
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			6.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, at which the Chair drew attention to the information note on the organization of the session posted on the SBSTA 45 web page. The Chair also drew the attention of the delegates to the deadline for the work of all groups to conclude by 1 p.m. on Friday, 11 November, which was aimed at ensuring the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary, on Monday, 14 November. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to proceed on this basis and in line with previously adopted conclusions of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			7.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, as well as at its 3rd meeting, on 14 November. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled rule 27 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, whereby the SBSTA is expected to elect its Vice-Chair and Rapporteur. At the same meeting, the SBSTA noted that the consultations on the nominations were ongoing.
			8.	At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA elected Mr. Schaffhauser as Vice-Chair, and Mr. Fernandes Santana as Rapporteur.
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change
(Agenda item 3)
			1.	Proceedings
				9.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2016/INF.10. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Shereen D’Souza (United States of America) and Mr. Ainun Nishat (Bangladesh). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				10.	The SBSTA welcomed the report on progress made in implementing activities under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change (NWP).
				11.	The SBSTA expressed its appreciation for the contributions of NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations to the activities undertaken under the NWP referred to in paragraph 10 above.
				12.	The SBSTA acknowledged the submissions from Parties, NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations on their recent work in the area of climate impacts on human health and noted that they provided a useful basis for the organization of the 10th Focal Point Forum.
				13.	The SBSTA welcomed the rich and constructive interactive dialogue among Parties, NWP partner organizations, other relevant organizations and health experts on climate impacts on human health that took place during the 10th Focal Point Forum, which was held under the overall guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA in conjunction with SBSTA 45. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the extensive work that is being undertaken by Parties and organizations in response to the current and future impacts of climate change on health, and welcomed the dialogue on innovative actions to address such impacts.
				14.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare, in consultation with Focal Point Forum participants, a synthesis paper, based on the information provided by Parties and partner organizations in the submissions referred to in paragraph 12 above and during the 10th Focal Point Forum, for consideration at SBSTA 46 (May 2017). The SBSTA agreed to consider, at the same session, ways to improve the effectiveness of the Focal Point Forum.
				15.	The SBSTA welcomed the following activities undertaken by the secretariat in collaboration with NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations in response to recommendations made by the Adaptation Committee (AC) and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG) and acknowledged that the activities have strengthened the role of the NWP in providing knowledge support to the work of the AC and the LEG:
					(a)	Joint organization of a technical session with the LEG in collaboration with relevant NWP partner organizations, held at the 2016 NAP Expo, to discuss how vulnerable communities, groups and ecosystems can best be considered in the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans (NAPs);
					(b)	Organization of a networking session with NWP partner organizations and relevant organizations, held at the 2016 NAP Expo, to facilitate dialogue on opportunities for inputs to and collaboration on activities under the NWP, in particular activities to support the process to formulate and implement NAPs;
					(c)	Supporting the AC side event on establishing a partnership platform with regional centres to provide technical support to developing country Parties for adaptation, held at the forty-fourth sessions of the subsidiary bodies;
					(d)	Preparation of an inventory of ongoing monitoring and evaluation work and a background paper thereon for the 10th meeting of the AC, with a view to the AC agreeing on additional work on monitoring and evaluation systems and impact evaluation.
				16.	The SBSTA also welcomed the recommendations of the AC and the LEG on the following activities to be undertaken under the NWP and requested the secretariat to undertake these activities under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA:
					(a)	Preparation of an overview of the landscape of existing platforms, including gaps, in collaboration with the Climate Technology Centre and Network, with a view to reporting back to the AC at its 12th meeting on progress made;
					(b)	Engagement of NWP partner organizations in supporting various activities of the LEG in providing overall technical support to the LDCs, including the convening of regional NAP Expos; the organization of training on NAPs; the development of Open NAP case studies; and the preparation of an information paper on considerations regarding vulnerable communities, groups and ecosystems in the context of the process to formulate and implement NAPs.
				17.	The SBSTA further welcomed the organization of priority-setting workshops for five subregions under the Lima Adaptation Knowledge Initiative, with two focusing on the LDCs, two on Africa and one on small island developing States, and in particular two recent workshops for the Hindu Kush Himalayan region and Indian Ocean island countries in collaboration with the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development and the International Water Management Institute, respectively. In addition, it welcomed the commitment of the United Nations Environment Programme, through its Global Adaptation Network, to engage with partners in order to scale up the Lima Adaptation Knowledge Initiative in other subregions with a view to removing knowledge gaps, which are barriers to adaptation action.
				18.	The SBSTA concluded that the activities under the NWP, in accordance with the conclusions of SBSTA 44, including the recommendations made by the LEG and the AC, should be implemented in a way that enhances the role of the NWP as a knowledge hub that supports enhanced action on adaptation.
				19.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat, in implementing the activities referred to in paragraph 18 above, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, to explore opportunities to strengthen the partnerships with regional centres and networks, local and municipal government, the private sector, scientific organizations, academia, organizations representing indigenous and traditional communities, spiritual and religious groups, gender constituencies, youth organizations and the mass media, and the linkages with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, as appropriate.
	IV.	Report of the Adaptation Committee
(Agenda item 4)
		Proceedings
			20.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2016/2. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item together with agenda item 10 of the SBI in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Julio Cordano (Chile) and Mr. Gottfried von Gemmingen (Germany). As referred to by the Conference of the Parties (COP), the SBSTA also considered the issue of the review of the progress and performance of the AC, and agreed that it would be discussed at the same informal consultations. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on these matters for consideration and adoption at COP 22.
	V.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 5)
		Proceedings
			21.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting and resumed 3rd meeting, on 15 November. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2016/3. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item together with agenda item 11 of the SBI in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Beth Lavender (Canada) and Mr. Alf Wills (South Africa). As referred to by the COP, the SBSTA also considered the issue of the review of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts, and agreed that it would be discussed at the same informal consultations. At its resumed 3rd meeting, the SBSTA recommended two draft decisions on these matters for consideration and adoption at COP 22.
		VI.	Development and transfer of technologies
(Agenda item 6)
			A.	Joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network
(Agenda sub-item 6(a))
				Proceedings
					22.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2016/1. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with agenda sub-item 12(a) of the SBI in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Elfriede-Anna More (Austria) and Mr. Washington Zhakata (Zimbabwe). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 22.
			B.	Technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 6(b))
				1.	Proceedings
					23.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2016/INF.9 and FCCC/SBSTA/2016/MISC.4. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. More and Mr. Zhakata. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					24.	The SBSTA continued its deliberations on the elaboration of the technology framework established under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the technology framework).
					25.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the views submitted by Parties on the elaboration of the technology framework and the information note prepared by the secretariat on mapping climate technology development and transfer activities and initiatives under and outside the Convention relevant to the implementation of the Paris Agreement.
					26.	The SBSTA recognized the importance of strengthening cooperation and synergies between activities and initiatives to support the implementation of the Paris Agreement.
					27.	The SBSTA agreed that the technology framework should be short, concise, balanced and comprehensive and allow flexibility to respond to changes over time.
					28.	The SBSTA also agreed that the purpose of the technology framework is as stipulated in Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement. It noted that the technology framework can play a strategic role in improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the work of the Technology Mechanism by addressing the transformational changes envisioned in the Paris Agreement, consistent with its Article 10, paragraph 4, and the long-term vision for technology development and transfer, referred to in its Article 10, paragraph 1.
					29.	The SBSTA further agreed that the initial key themes for the technology framework are:
						(a)	Innovation;
						(b)	Implementation;
						(c)	Enabling environments and capacity-building;
						(d)	Collaboration and stakeholder engagement;
						(e)	Support.
						30.	The SBSTA invited Parties, observers and other stakeholders to submit, by 10 April 2017, their views on the principles and structure of the technology framework.
						31.	The SBSTA agreed to continue, at SBSTA 46, its consideration of the elaboration of the technology framework, taking into account Parties’ deliberations at this session.
		VII.	Issues relating to agriculture
(Agenda item 7)
			1.	Proceedings
				32.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2016/INF.5 and FCCC/SBSTA/2016/INF.6. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Emmanuel Dlamini (Swaziland) and Mr. Heikki Granholm (Finland). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				33.	The SBSTA, in accordance with decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 75, continued its work on issues relating to agriculture in the areas referred to in document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/2, paragraph 85(a–d).
				34.	It took note of the views submitted by Parties and observers in response to the invitation of SBSTA 40.
				35.	In accordance with the conclusions of SBSTA 43, the SBSTA continued its consideration of the reports on the four workshops held in conjunction with SBSTA 42 and SBSTA 44 and welcomed those reports.
				36.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this agenda item at SBSTA 46.
		VIII.	Matters relating to science and review
(Agenda item 8)
			A.	Research and systematic observation
(Agenda sub-item 8(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					37.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Ann Gordon (Belize) and Mr. Sylvain Mondon (France). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below. At the same meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 22.
				2.	Conclusions
					38.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the statements delivered by representatives of GCOS, the United States of America on behalf of CEOS and the Coordination Group for Meteorological Satellites, the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs, the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO).
					39.	The SBSTA noted the need for regional workshops, as identified by the GCOS 2016 implementation plan, The Global Observing System for Climate: Implementation Needs (hereinafter referred to as the GCOS IP 2016), and invited the GCOS to organize such workshops, taking into consideration the benefit of organizing these workshops in collaboration with relevant partners.
					40.	The SBSTA encouraged Parties and relevant organizations to take advantage of support available via the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism as well as other relevant organizations and channels as appropriate to support the implementation of the GCOS IP 2016. It also encouraged Parties and relevant organizations to strengthen and maintain observation networks and capabilities in all countries, especially in developing countries, including the LDCs and small island developing States.
					41.	The SBSTA invited the secretariat of GCOS to report on progress made in the implementation of the GCOS IP 2016 on a regular basis, at subsequent sessions of the SBSTA, as appropriate.
					42.	The SBSTA recalled its conclusions from SBSTA 41, and encouraged CEOS to submit its comprehensive space agency response to the GCOS IP 2016 at SBSTA 47 (November 2017).
					43.	The SBSTA welcomed the submissions from WMO: The Global Climate in 2011–2015 and the WMO Greenhouse Gas Bulletin, and invited WMO to provide submissions on the state of the global climate on a regular basis, as appropriate, at subsequent sessions of the SBSTA.
					44.	The SBSTA noted the Earth Information Day that was organized by the secretariat on 8 November 2016, under the guidance of the SBSTA Chair, and also noted that the SBSTA Chair plans to produce a summary report on the event, to be made available before SBSTA 46. The SBSTA invited Parties to consider inviting the secretariat to organize similar events during the implementation of the GCOS IP 2016, based on submissions from Parties. It invited submissions on this matter by Parties by SBSTA 49 (December 2018).
					45.	The SBSTA recognized the role of WCRP and the wider research community in developing the new essential climate variables identified in the GCOS IP 2016 with a view to supporting decision-making on adaptation and mitigation.
					46.	The SBSTA recommended a draft decision on the implementation of the GCOS IP 2016 for consideration and adoption at COP 22.
				B.	Advice on how the assessments of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change can inform the global stocktake referred to in Article 14 of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 8(b))
					1.	Proceedings
						47.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Patience Damptey (Mali) and Mr. Frank McGovern (Ireland). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
					2.	Conclusions
						48.	The SBSTA, in response to the mandate from COP 21, considered advice on how the assessments of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) can inform the global stocktake of the implementation of the Paris Agreement pursuant to its Article 14.
						49.	The SBSTA welcomed the views submitted by Parties on advice on how the assessments of the IPCC can inform the global stocktake.
						50.	The SBSTA acknowledged that the products of the IPCC assessment cycles will be key inputs to the global stocktake and will provide the best available scientific knowledge that is policy-relevant but not policy-prescriptive, providing an integrated scientific, technical and socioeconomic perspective.
						51.	The SBSTA noted that the forthcoming products of the sixth IPCC assessment cycle will be key inputs to the first global stocktake in 2023. It recognized that the products of the sixth IPCC assessment cycle will become available at different stages during the period 2018–2022. It noted that the timing of the sixth IPCC assessment cycle will therefore be aligned with the first global stocktake.
						52.	The SBSTA welcomed the decision of the IPCC to take into account the outcomes of COP 21 when determining its programme of work and products for the sixth assessment cycle. It encouraged the IPCC to pay particular attention to the first global stocktake when scoping its sixth assessment report, taking into account that the global stocktake will assess collective progress towards achieving the purpose of the Paris Agreement and its long-term goals in a comprehensive and facilitative manner, considering mitigation, adaptation and the means of implementation and support, in the light of equity and the best available science.
						53.	The SBSTA noted the IPCC’s invitation to governments to identify their priority information needs to help inform the scoping of the sixth assessment report and it encouraged participation in the process.
						54.	The SBSTA noted the need for sufficient time to ensure transparent and reliable scientific assessment cycles, and welcomed the IPCC’s decision to request its secretariat to “prepare proposals for aligning the work of the IPCC during its Seventh Assessment Report with the needs of the global stocktake foreseen under the Paris Agreement and to submit these proposals for consideration at a plenary session of the IPCC no later than 2018”. The SBSTA encouraged the IPCC to continue this consideration, with a view to ensuring that the global stocktake is always informed in a timely manner by the best available science.
						55.	The SBSTA invited the IPCC to consider any outcome, including possible scientific information gaps, from the global stocktake that the IPCC views as relevant to inform its future assessments.
						56.	The SBSTA, as requested by the COP, provided the following advice, consistent with its mandate in decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 100, on how the assessments of the IPCC can inform the global stocktake referred to in Article 14 of the Paris Agreement, recognizing that identification of the sources of input for the global stocktake will be undertaken by the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Paris Agreement (APA) in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 99:
							(a)	Lessons can be learned from past experience;
							(b)	Dialogue between IPCC experts and Parties on the findings of the IPCC products, enabling a focused scientific and technical exchange of information in an open and transparent manner, could be utilized;
							(c)	Convening special events, similar to the SBSTA–IPCC special event organized by the SBSTA and held on 18 May 2016, could be of value;
							(d)	Views emerging from the rich exchange of information between the IPCC and Parties at the SBSTA–IPCC special event referred to in paragraph 56(c) above could be further considered;
							(e)	Inputs from the IPCC should be considered in an effective and balanced manner, as part of the overall input to the global stocktake;
							(f)	The SBSTA–IPCC Joint Working Group could be used to enhance communication and coordination between the SBSTA and the IPCC in the context of the global stocktake.
	IX.	Impact of the implementation of response measures 
(Agenda item 9)
		A.	Improved forum and work programme
(Agenda sub-item 9(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				57.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SB/2016/INF.2 and FCCC/TP/2016/7. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with SBI agenda sub-item 15(a) and to convene the improved forum in accordance with the procedure applicable to a contact group co-chaired by the Chair of the SBSTA and the Chair of the SBI, Mr. Tomasz Chruszczow (Poland), assisted by Ms. Natalya Kushko (Ukraine) and Mr. Andrei Marcu (Panama). The SBSTA also agreed to consider this agenda sub-item back-to-back with SBSTA agenda sub-item 9(b) and SBI agenda sub-item 15(b). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				58.	The SBI and the SBSTA convened the 2nd meeting of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures and recalled the work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				59.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the report of the workshop on views and experiences on economic diversification and transformation and on just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs, held in Doha on 2–4 October 2016, and expressed their gratitude to the Government of Qatar for hosting this workshop.
				60.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the views expressed by Parties and observer organizations, contained in their submissions, on economic diversification and transformation and on just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs, taking into account paragraphs 1 and 6 of decision 11/CP.21, in the context of sustainable development, in order to implement the work of the improved forum.
				61.	The SBI and the SBSTA held an in-forum discussion on the workshop referred to in paragraph 59 above and agreed to advance the technical work on the impact of the implementation of response measures by constituting an ad hoc technical expert group to meet in-session during the forty-sixth sessions of the subsidiary bodies. They also agreed that the ad hoc technical expert group should elaborate on the technical work on the areas of the work programme in the context of sustainable development.
				62.	The SBI and the SBSTA further agreed that the ad hoc technical expert group will spend two days – one day on each – on considering the two areas of the work programme.
				63.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested Parties to forward to the secretariat their nominations of experts in accordance with the terms of reference through the coordinators of the regional groups by 28 February 2017. Experts should have relevant qualifications and expertise, and at least five years of professional experience on the issues referred to in paragraph 61 above. The SBI and the SBSTA also requested the secretariat to publish the list of all experts nominated on the UNFCCC website by 15 March 2017.
				64.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested their Chairs to invite relevant intergovernmental and international organizations, including the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Development Programme, the International Labour Organization, the International Trade Union Confederation or others, to nominate two experts.
				65.	The SBI and the SBSTA agreed that the ad hoc technical expert group will nominate its co-chairs at the opening contact group of the 3rd meeting of the improved forum at the forty-sixth sessions of the subsidiary bodies.
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures 
(Agenda sub-item 9(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				66.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with SBI agenda sub-item 15(b) and back-to-back with SBSTA agenda sub-item 9(a) and SBI agenda sub-item 15(a). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				67.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the submissions from Parties and observer organizations and welcomed the views expressed therein on this agenda sub-item.
				68.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the Chairs of the SBI and the SBSTA, with the support of the secretariat, to prepare by 31 March 2017 a reflections note on the views expressed by Parties, both in the submissions referred to in paragraph 67 above and in the aforementioned discussions, relating to the modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures referred to in paragraph 34 of decision 1/CP.21, with a view to facilitating Parties’ further discussions thereon at SBI 46 (May 2017) and SBSTA 46.
		C.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 9(c))
			Proceedings
				69.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to the Chair’s proposal that substantive discussions under this agenda sub-item would take place jointly with those on the response measures forum, considered under sub-item 9(a). At the 3rd meeting, the Chair informed the SBSTA that no conclusions had been reached on this matter. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to continue the consideration of this matter at SBSTA 46.
		X.	Methodological issues under the Convention 
(Agenda item 10)
			A.	Greenhouse gas data interface
(Agenda sub-item 10(a))
				Proceedings
					70.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Takeshi Enoki (Japan) and Mr. Thapelo Letete (South Africa). At its 3rd meeting, the Chair informed the SBSTA that Parties were unable to agree on any conclusions and that this matter would be considered at the next session, in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
			B.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport
(Agenda sub-item 10(b))
				1.	Proceedings
					71.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2016/MISC.5. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair would consult with interested Parties on this matter and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 3rd meeting, at which the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					72.	The SBSTA took note of the information received from and results reported by the secretariats of ICAO and IMO, and noted the views thereon expressed by Parties under SBSTA 45 agenda item 10, “Methodological issues under the Convention”, sub-item (b), “Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport”.
					73.	The SBSTA invited the secretariats of ICAO and IMO to continue to report, at future sessions of the SBSTA, on their ongoing work on relevant issues.
		XI.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol 
(Agenda item 11)
			A.	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development mechanism
(Agenda sub-item 11(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					74.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2016/INF.7. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Maya Hunt (New Zealand) and Mr. José Antonio Prado (Chile). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					75.	The SBSTA continued its consideration of the work programmes referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraphs 5, 6, 7 and 10.
					76.	The SBSTA took note of the report prepared by the secretariat on the in-session workshop on revegetation activities held during SBSTA 44.
					77.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of the work programmes referred to in paragraph 75 above at SBSTA 46 with a view to recommending a draft decision in relation to the work programmes referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraphs 6, 7 and 10, for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) at its thirteenth session (November 2017), and to reporting to the CMP on the outcomes of the work programme referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraph 5, at the same session.
			B.	Carbon dioxide capture and storage in geological formations as clean development mechanism project activities
(Agenda sub-item 11(b))
				1.	Proceedings
					78.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair would consult with interested Parties on this matter and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 3rd meeting, at which the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below. At the same meeting, the SBSTA recommended draft conclusions on this matter for consideration and adoption at CMP 12.
				2.	Conclusions
					79.	In accordance with decision 5/CMP.8, paragraphs 40 and 41, the SBSTA continued its consideration of the eligibility under the clean development mechanism of project activities consisting of carbon dioxide capture and storage in geological formations that involve the transport of carbon dioxide from one country to another or geological storage sites that are in more than one country; and the establishment of a global reserve of certified emission reduction units for carbon dioxide capture and storage in geological formations.
					80.	The SBSTA recommended draft conclusions on this matter for consideration and adoption at CMP 12.
	XII.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 12)
		A.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 12(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				81.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Kelley Kizzier (EU) and Mr. Hugh Sealy (Maldives). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				82.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 36, continued its work on the development of the guidance referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement.
				83.	The SBSTA noted the importance of Article 6, paragraph 1, to its work.
				84.	The SBSTA also noted that Parties engaged in a productive exchange of views on Article 6, paragraphs 2 and 3, of the Paris Agreement and decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 36, throughout this session and focused on establishing a common understanding of the matters related to the guidance referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, while continuing to ensure balanced progress, maintained between all three different sub-agenda items (12(a), 12(b) and 12(c)).
				85.	The SBSTA invited Parties to submit, by 17 March 2017, their views on, inter alia, the elements to be addressed, including their operationalization, in the guidance referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, overarching issues, and relationships between Article 6, paragraph 2, and other provisions of the Paris Agreement, the Convention and its related legal instruments, as relevant.
				86.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize a round-table discussion among Parties based on the submissions, in conjunction with SBSTA 46, while ensuring broad participation of developing and developed countries.
				87.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 86 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
				88.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBSTA 46.
		B.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda sub-item 12(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				89.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Kizzier and Mr. Sealy. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				90.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 38, continued its work on the development of the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
				91.	The SBSTA noted the importance of Article 6, paragraph 1, to its work.
				92.	The SBSTA also noted that Parties engaged in a productive exchange of views on Article 6, paragraphs 4–6, of the Paris Agreement and decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 37 and 38, throughout this session and focused on establishing a common understanding of the matters related to the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement, while continuing to ensure balanced progress, maintained between all three agenda sub-items (12(a), 12(b) and 12(c)).
				93.	The SBSTA invited Parties to submit, by 17 March 2017, their views on, inter alia, the elements to be addressed, including their operationalization, in the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement, overarching issues, and relationships between Article 6, paragraphs 4–6, and other provisions of the Paris Agreement, the Convention and its related legal instruments, as relevant.
				94.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize a round-table discussion among Parties based on the submissions, in conjunction with SBSTA 46, while ensuring broad participation of developing and developed countries.
				95.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 94 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
				96.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBSTA 46.
		C.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 12(c))
			1.	Proceedings
				97.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Kizzier and Mr. Sealy. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				98.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 39 and 40, continued its work on the work programme under the framework for non-market approaches to sustainable development defined in Article 6, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement.
				99.	The SBSTA noted the importance of Article 6, paragraph 1, to its work.
				100.	The SBSTA also noted that Parties engaged in a productive exchange of views on Article 6, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Paris Agreement and decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 39 and 40, throughout this session and focused on establishing a common understanding of the matters related to the work programme referred to in decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 39 and 40, while continuing to ensure balanced progress, maintained between all three different sub-agenda items (12(a), 12(b) and 12(c)).
				101.	The SBSTA invited Parties to submit, by 17 March 2017, their views on, inter alia, the elements to be addressed, including their operationalization, in the decision on the work programme on the framework for non-market approaches to sustainable development defined in Article 6, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement, overarching issues, and relationships between Article 6, paragraphs 8 and 9, and other provisions of the Paris Agreement, the Convention and its related legal instruments, as relevant.
				102.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize a round-table discussion among Parties based on the submissions, in conjunction with SBSTA 46, while ensuring broad participation of developing and developed countries.
				103.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 102 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
				104.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBSTA 46.
	XIII.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 13)
		1.	Proceedings
			105.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2016/MISC.3. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Outi Honkatukia (Finland) and Mr. Rafael da Soler (Brazil). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			106.	The SBSTA welcomed the views submitted by Parties and observer organizations on the development of modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement.
			107.	The SBSTA also welcomed the constructive sharing of views during the in-session workshop on modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement, organized by the secretariat and held on 8 November 2016.
			108.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat, in its preparation of the technical paper referred to in document FCCC/SBSTA/2016/2, paragraph 110, to additionally draw on the following information:
				(a)	The structure of the guiding questions from the in-session workshop referred to in paragraph 107 above;
				(b)	Discussions that took place during this session;
				(c)	Relevant developments under and outside the Convention related to modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions, including the summary and recommendations by the Standing Committee on Finance on the 2016 biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows;
				(d)	The reflections note by the co-chairs of the contact group on this agenda item.
			109.	The SBSTA encouraged United Nations funds, programmes and specialized agencies as well as other organizations to inform the development of modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions, including by convening technical meetings, with the input and participation of developing and developed country Parties.
			110.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of the development of modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions at SBSTA 46, taking into account key considerations included in the reflections note referred to in paragraph 108(d) above and inviting the engagement of climate finance stakeholders from developed and developing country Parties and observer organizations.
			111.	The SBSTA recognized the need to ensure the development of modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement in time for them to be integrated into the transparency framework referred to in Article 13 of the Paris Agreement.
			112.	The SBSTA requested its Chair to undertake consultations with the Co-Chairs of the APA regarding the work of the SBSTA on this matter and the work of the APA on the development of modalities, procedures and guidelines for the transparency framework referred to in Article 13 of the Paris Agreement.
	XIV.	Reports on other activities
(Agenda item 14)
		A.	Annual report on the technical review of information reported under the Convention by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention in their biennial reports and national communications
(Agenda sub-item 14(a))
			Proceedings
				113.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2016/INF.8.
		B.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 14(b))
			Proceedings
				114.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2016/INF.11.
		C.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 14(c))
			Proceedings
				115.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2016/INF.12.
		XV.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 15)
			Proceedings
				116.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. No matters were raised under this agenda item.
		XVI.	Closure of and report on the session 
(Agenda item 16)
			1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
				117.	At the 3rd meeting of the SBSTA, a representative of the secretariat provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during the session in accordance with the provisions of rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
				118.	She informed the SBSTA that there were a number of activities coming out of negotiations at the session that call for more support by the secretariat and, therefore, require additional resources over and above the approved core budget for the biennium 2016–2017. Under agenda sub-items 12(a), “Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement”, 12(b), “Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement” and 12(c), “Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement”, a total of EUR 490,000 will be required to organize a round-table discussion among Parties based on their submissions, in conjunction with SBSTA 46.
				119.	The representative of the secretariat stated that the amount of EUR 490,000 was preliminary and was based on the information available at that time. She said she hoped that she could count on the continued generosity of Parties to provide additional funding for activities under the three agenda sub-items referred to in paragraph 118 above in a timely and predictable manner, because without supplementary contributions the secretariat would not be in a position to provide the requested support.
				120.	She further informed the SBSTA that some of the conclusions adopted at this session will have budgetary implications beyond 2017. The resource requirements for the biennium 2018–2019 will be reviewed in the context of established budgetary procedures.
			2.	Closure of and report on the session
				121.	At its resumed 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session.
				122.	Closing statements were made by representatives of 11 Parties, including on behalf of the African Group, AILAC, AOSIS, the Coalition for Rainforest Nations, the G77 and China, the EIG, the EU and its member States, the LDCs and the Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of research and independent non-governmental organizations (NGOs), trade union NGOs, women and gender NGOs, youth NGOs, business and industry NGOs, environmental NGOs, farmers NGOs and indigenous peoples organizations. The Chair thanked Parties, facilitators and the secretariat for their support and closed the session.
				
			
