|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBSTA/2015/5 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 29 January 2016  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its forty-third session,
held in Paris from 1 to 4 December 2015
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session 
		(Agenda item 1)		1–2	4
		II.	Organizational matters 
		(Agenda item 2)		3–7	4
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		3–5	4
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		6	6
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair		7	6
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation 
		to climate change 
		(Agenda item 3)		8–15	7
		IV.	Report of the Adaptation Committee 
		(Agenda item 4)		16	8
		V.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation 
		of the Technology Mechanism: joint annual report of the 
		Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology 
		Centre and Network 
		(Agenda item 5)		17	8
		VI.	Issues relating to agriculture 
		(Agenda item 6)		18–20	9
		VII.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International 
		Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts 
		(Agenda item 7)		21	9
			Paragraphs	Page
		VIII.	Matters relating to science and review 
		(Agenda item 8)		22–33	10
		A.	Research and systematic observation		22–32	10
		B.	The 2013–2015 review		33	11
		IX.	Impact of the implementation of response measures 
		(Agenda item 9)		34–38	12
		A.	Forum and work programme		34–37	12
		B.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol		38	12
		X.	Methodological issues under the Convention 
		(Agenda item 10)		39–43	13
		A.	Methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties 
			included in Annex I to the Convention		39	13
		B.	Greenhouse gas data interface		40	13
		C.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and 
			maritime transport		41–43	13
		XI.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol 
		(Agenda item 11)		44–58	14
		A.	Implications of the implementation of decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 
			and 1/CMP.8 on the previous decisions on methodological issues 
			related to the Kyoto Protocol, including those relating to Articles 5, 7 
			and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol		44–47	14
		B.	Accounting, reporting and review requirements for Parties 
			included in Annex I without quantified emission limitation and 
			reduction commitments for the second commitment period		48–50	14
		C.	Clarification of the text in section G (Article 3, paragraph 7 ter) 
			of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in particular 
			the information to be used to determine the “average annual 
			emissions for the first three years of the preceding commitment 
			period”		51–53	15
		D.	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 
			and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development 
			mechanism		54–58	15
		XII.	Market and non-market mechanisms under the Convention 
		(Agenda item 12)		59	16
		A.	Framework for various approaches		59	16
		B.	Non-market-based approaches		59	16
		C.	New market-based mechanism		59	16
		XIII.	Reports on other activities
		(Agenda item 13)		60–67	17
		A.	Annual report on the technical review of information reported 
			under the Convention related to biennial reports and national 
			communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		60	17
			Paragraphs	Page
		B.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories 
			of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		61–63	17
		C.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories 
			and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, 
			as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol		64–66	17
		D.	Report on the implementation of domestic action by Parties included 
			in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol, 
			based on the information reported in their national communications		67	18
		XIV.	Other matters
		(Agenda item 14)		68	18
		XV.	Closure of and report on the session 
		(Agenda item 15)		69–75	18
		
		
	I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)
		1.	The forty-third session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held at the United Nations Climate Change Conference, Paris–Le Bourget, France, from 1 to 4 December 2015.
		2.	The Chair of the SBSTA, Ms. Lidia Wojtal (Poland), opened the session on Tuesday, 1 December, and welcomed all Parties and observers. She also welcomed Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize) as Vice-Chair of the SBSTA and Ms. Stasile Znutiene (Lithuania) as Rapporteur.
	II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
			3.	At its 1st meeting, on 1 December, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/3).
			4.	At the same meeting, the SBSTA adopted its agenda as follows:
			1.	Opening of the session.
			2.	Organizational matters:
				(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
				(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
				(c)	Election of officers other than the Chair.
			3.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate 				change.
			4.	Report of the Adaptation Committee.
				5.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network.
			6.	Issues relating to agriculture.
				7.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.
			8.	Matters relating to science and review:
				(a)	Research and systematic observation;
				(b)	The 2013–2015 review.
			9.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
				(a)	Forum and work programme;
				(b)	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol.
			10.	Methodological issues under the Convention:
				(a)	Methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(b)	Greenhouse gas data interface;
				(c)	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport.
			11.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol:
				(a)	Implications of the implementation of decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 and 1/CMP.8 on the previous decisions on methodological issues related to the Kyoto Protocol, including those relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol;
				(b)	Accounting, reporting and review requirements for Parties included in Annex I without quantified emission limitation and reduction commitments for the second commitment period;
				(c)	Clarification of the text in section G (Article 3, paragraph 7 ter) of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in particular the information to be used to determine the “average annual emissions for the first three years of the preceding commitment period”;
				(d)	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development mechanism.
			12.	Market and non-market mechanisms under the Convention:
				(a)	Framework for various approaches;
				(b)	Non-market-based approaches;
				(c)	New market-based mechanism.
			13.	Reports on other activities:
				(a)	Annual report on the technical review of information reported under the Convention related to biennial reports and national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(b)	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(c)	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol;
				(d)	Report on the implementation of domestic action by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol, based on the information reported in their national communications.
			14.	Other matters.
			15.	Closure of and report on the session.
				5.	At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed that statements would be made following the adoption of the agenda and the launch of work. Statements were provided by representatives of 15 Parties, including on behalf of the African Group, the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), the Coalition for Rainforest Nations, the Group of 77 and China (G77 and China), the European Union (EU) and its 28 member States, the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean, the least developed countries (LDCs), the Umbrella Group and another group of Parties. Statements were also made by representatives of the Technology Executive Committee, the Climate Technology Centre and Network, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) and the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS), as well as by representatives of business and industry non-governmental organizations (NGOs), environmental NGOs (ENGOs), farmers NGOs, research and independent NGOs, trade union NGOs, and women and gender NGOs.
		B.	Organization of the work of the session 
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			6.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, at which the Chair drew attention to the proposed programme of work posted on the SBSTA 43 web page. In line with previously adopted conclusions of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices, the Chair informed the SBSTA that she would apply firm time management measures in order to enhance the efficiency, timeliness and transparency of work. The Chair also drew the attention of the delegates to a deadline for concluding the work of all groups of noon on 3 December 2015, which aimed to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to proceed on this basis.
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			7.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, as well as at its 2nd meeting, held on 4 December. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled rule 27 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, whereby the SBSTA is expected to elect its Vice-Chair and Rapporteur. At the 2nd meeting, the SBSTA elected Mr. Tibor Schaffhauser (Hungary) as Vice-Chair of the SBSTA and Mr. Aderito Manuel Fernandes Santana (Sao Tome and Principe) as its Rapporteur.
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change
(Agenda item 3)
			1.	Proceedings
				8.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2015/4 and FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.8. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that its Chair would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				9.	The SBSTA welcomed the following documents prepared for SBSTA 43:
					(a)	Good practices and lessons learned in adaptation planning processes, addressing ecosystems, human settlements, water resources and health, and in processes and structures for linking national and local adaptation planning: a synthesis of case studies;
					(b)	The report on progress made in implementing activities under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change.
				10.	The SBSTA expressed its appreciation to the EU and New Zealand for providing financial support for the implementation of activities under the Nairobi work programme.
				11.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the inputs of the Adaptation Committee (AC) and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG) to the synthesis of case studies referred to in paragraph 9(a) above. It recognized that collaborative activities have led to stronger linkages between the Nairobi work programme, the AC and the LEG.
				12.	The SBSTA also noted the valuable information exchange among Parties and Nairobi work programme partner organizations that took place at the 9th Nairobi work programme Focal Point Forum, organized in conjunction with SBSTA 43, and further noted with appreciation the valuable substantive inputs from the AC, the LEG and experts from Nairobi work programme partner organizations to the organization of the forum. The SBSTA requested the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, to continue to collaborate with interested Parties and relevant Nairobi work programme partner organizations.
				13.	The SBSTA noted the information provided by UNEP and welcomed the ongoing work under the Lima Adaptation Knowledge Initiative (LAKI), in particular the successful organization of the priority-setting workshops in the Gulf Cooperation Council subregion and in the Southern Africa subregion. It welcomed the commitment of UNEP, through its Global Adaptation Network, to implementing the LAKI in other subregions in 2016, in response to the conclusions of SBSTA 41.
				14.	The SBSTA welcomed the launch of the adaptation knowledge portal under the Nairobi work programme and recognized its role in enhancing the dissemination of knowledge developed under the Nairobi work programme, the AC and the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts, including contributions made by Parties, Nairobi work programme partner organizations, and regional centres and networks.
				15.	The SBSTA also welcomed the following activities that have been undertaken by the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, in response to recommendations of the AC:
					(a)	Provision of support to the expert meeting of the AC, in collaboration with relevant Nairobi work programme partner organizations, on promoting livelihoods and economic diversification so as to build resilience in the context of planning, prioritizing and implementing adaptation actions;
					(b)	Through the adaptation knowledge portal, dissemination of information developed by the AC on regional centres and networks.
	IV.	Report of the Adaptation Committee
(Agenda item 4)
		Proceedings
			16.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2015/2. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item together with SBI agenda item 8 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Anton Hilber (Switzerland) and Ms. Malia Talakai (Nauru). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
	V.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network
(Agenda item 5)
		Proceedings
			17.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SB/2015/1 and FCCC/SB/2015/INF.3. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item together with SBI agenda sub-item 10(a) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize) and Ms. Elfriede More (Austria). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
	VI.	Issues relating to agriculture
(Agenda item 6)
		1.	Proceedings
			18.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.6 and FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.7. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Emmanuel Dlamini (Swaziland) and Mr. Heikki Granholm (Finland). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			19.	The SBSTA took note of the reports on the two in-session workshops contained in documents FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.6 and FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.7.
			20.	It agreed to continue its consideration of the reports referred to in paragraph 19 above at SBSTA 44 (May 2016) and, together with the reports on the two in-session workshops to be held at SBSTA 44 on the issues referred to in document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/2, paragraph 85(c) and (d), at SBSTA 45 (November 2016), in accordance with document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/2, paragraphs 83-89.
	VII.	Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 7)
		Proceedings
			21.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2015/3. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item together with SBI agenda item 9 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago) and Ms. Beth Lavender (Canada). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
		VIII.	Matters relating to science and review
(Agenda item 8)
			A.	Research and systematic observation
(Agenda sub-item 8(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					22.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Chris Moseki (South Africa) and Mr. Stefan Rösner (Germany). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					23.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the statements delivered by representatives of GCOS, IOC of UNESCO, the IPCC, WMO and Australia on behalf of CEOS and the Coordination Group for Meteorological Satellites (CGMS).
					24.	It also noted with appreciation the report by GCOS entitled Status of the Global Observing System for Climate (hereinafter referred to as GCOS SR 2015), which provides an assessment of the adequacy of the global observing system and progress made in the implementation of the GCOS Implementation Plan for the Global Observing System for Climate in Support of the UNFCCC (2010 Update), the executive summary of GCOS SR 2015, and the draft outline of a new GCOS Implementation Plan (hereinafter referred to as GCOS IP 2016).
					25.	The SBSTA noted the report by GCOS on the workshop “Enhancing observations to support preparedness and adaptation in a changing climate – learning from the IPCC 5th Assessment Report”, held from 10 to 12 February 2015 in Bonn, Germany, and welcomed the cooperation between GCOS, the IPCC and the secretariat in organizing the workshop.
					26.	The SBSTA also noted the CEOS and CGMS joint report on progress made by space agencies providing global observations on their coordinated response to relevant needs of the Convention.
					27.	The SBSTA noted the WMO report on relevant outcomes of the seventeenth World Meteorological Congress, which was held in Geneva, Switzerland, from 25 May to 12 June 2015, and progress made on the implementation of the Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS).
					28.	The SBSTA recognized the progress made in improving observing systems for climate, as relevant to the Convention, and encouraged GCOS to consider the outcomes of COP 21 when preparing the GCOS IP 2016.
					29.	The SBSTA invited GCOS to collaborate with relevant partners to continue enhancing access to, and understanding and interpretation of, data products and information to support decision-making on adaptation and mitigation at national, regional and global scales.
					30.	The SBSTA urged Parties to work towards addressing the priorities and gaps identified in the GCOS SR 2015, and invited Parties and relevant organizations to provide inputs to, and contribute to the review of, the GCOS IP 2016.
					31.	The SBSTA welcomed the WMO supplement to the technical guidelines for the national adaptation plan process outlining how GFCS could provide support.
					32.	The SBSTA encouraged Parties and relevant organizations to enhance systematic observations related to the understanding and prediction of extreme events.
				B.	The 2013–2015 review 
(Agenda sub-item 8(b))
					Proceedings
						33.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item jointly with SBI agenda item 13 in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Leon Charles (Grenada) and Ms. Gertraud Wollansky (Austria). At the 2nd meeting, the Chair of the SBSTA informed Parties that the SBSTA and the SBI could not conclude their considerations and findings on the 2013–2015 review, and that the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies would seek further guidance from the President of the COP in accordance with decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 166.
	IX.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
(Agenda item 9)
		A.	Forum and work programme
(Agenda sub-item 9(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				34.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with SBI agenda sub-item 12(a) in a contact group co-chaired by the Chair of the SBSTA and the Chair of the SBI, Mr. Amena Yauvoli (Fiji). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				35.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the submissions from Parties on the further elaboration of the work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures and the modalities for its implementation.
				36.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the draft decision text contained in the annex to document FCCC/SB/2015/L.2 on the forum and work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures along with the submissions from Parties, as referred to in paragraph 35 above.
				37.	The SBI and the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on this matter for further consideration and adoption at COP 21.
		B.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 9(b))
			Proceedings
				38.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to consider at this session this agenda sub-item jointly with SBSTA agenda sub-item 9(a) and SBI agenda sub-item 12(a). At the same meeting, the SBSTA also agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would undertake consultations with interested Parties on how to take up this agenda sub-item at SBSTA 44. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to continue consideration at SBSTA 44 of how to take up this agenda sub-item.
		X.	Methodological issues under the Convention 
(Agenda item 10)
			A.	Methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 10(a))
				Proceedings
					39.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Roger Dungan (New Zealand) and Mr. Seyni Nafo (Mali). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
			B.	Greenhouse gas data interface
(Agenda sub-item 10(b))
				Proceedings
					40.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and agreed to defer the consideration of this agenda sub-item to SBSTA 44.
			C.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport
(Agenda sub-item 10(c))
				1.	Proceedings
					41.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/MISC.5. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting, where the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					42.	The SBSTA took note of the information received from and progress reported by the secretariats of ICAO and IMO on their ongoing work on addressing emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport, and noted the views expressed by Parties on this information.
					43.	The SBSTA invited the secretariats of ICAO and IMO to continue to report, at future sessions of the SBSTA, on relevant work on this issue.
		XI.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol 
(Agenda item 11)
			A.	Implications of the implementation of decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 and 1/CMP.8 on the previous decisions on methodological issues related to the Kyoto Protocol, including those relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 11(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					44.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Guilherme do Prado Lima (Brazil) and Ms. Anke Herold (Germany). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					45.	At the request of the CMP, the SBSTA continued its work on assessing and addressing the implications of the implementation of decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 and 1/CMP.8 on the previous decisions on methodological issues related to the Kyoto Protocol, including those relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol.
					46.	The SBSTA concluded its work on the matters referred to in paragraph 45 above and agreed to forward to the CMP the draft decision texts on the implications of the implementation of decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 and 1/CMP.8 on the previous decisions on methodological issues related to the Kyoto Protocol, including those relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol, for consideration and adoption at CMP 11.
					47.	SBSTA 42 agreed to forward to the CMP a draft decision on the training programme for members of expert review teams participating in annual reviews under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol for consideration and adoption at CMP 11.
			B.	Accounting, reporting and review requirements for Parties included in Annex I without quantified emission limitation and reduction commitments for the second commitment period
(Agenda sub-item 11(b))
				1.	Proceedings
					48.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. do Prado Lima and Ms. Herold. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					49.	The SBSTA continued its consideration of the accounting, reporting and review requirements for Parties included in Annex I without quantified emission limitation and reduction commitments for the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol, as agreed at SBSTA 41.
					50.	The SBSTA, noting that the draft texts adopted as decisions 3/CMP.11 and 4/CMP.11 address these matters sufficiently, agreed that its work under this agenda sub-item has been completed.
			C.	Clarification of the text in section G (Article 3, paragraph 7 ter) of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in particular the information to be used to determine the “average annual emissions for the first three years of the preceding commitment period”
(Agenda sub-item 11(c))
				1.	Proceedings
					51.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. do Prado Lima and Ms. Herold. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					52.	In response to the request made at CMP 10, the SBSTA continued its consideration of the issues related to the clarification of the text in section G (Article 3, paragraph 7 ter) of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in particular the information to be used to determine the “average annual emissions for the first three years of the preceding commitment period”.
					53.	The SBSTA concluded its work on this agenda sub-item. It recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at CMP 11.
		D.	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development mechanism
(Agenda sub-item 11(d))
			1.	Proceedings
				54.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that its Chair would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting, where the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				55.	The SBSTA continued its work under the work programme referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraph 6, to consider and, as appropriate, develop and recommend modalities and procedures for possible additional land use, land-use change and forestry activities under the clean development mechanism (CDM).
				56.	The SBSTA took note of the outcome of the assessment by the CDM Executive Board of the applicability of the modalities and procedures contained in decisions 5/CMP.1 and 6/CMP.1 to project activities involving revegetation contained in the 2015 report of the CDM Executive Board to the CMP.
				57.	Recalling its earlier requests to the secretariat to organize a workshop, the SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize an in-session workshop at SBSTA 44 to identify the types of revegetation activities potentially eligible as project activities under the CDM under the existing modalities and procedures contained in decisions 5/CMP.1 and 6/CMP.1, and to identify the cases where new modalities and procedures for revegetation would need to be developed in order to guarantee the environmental integrity of the CDM.
				58.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of the work programme referred to in paragraph 55 above at SBSTA 44 with a view to recommending a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at CMP 12 (November 2016).
		XII.	Market and non-market mechanisms under the Convention 
(Agenda item 12)
			A.	Framework for various approaches 
(Agenda sub-item 12(a))
			B.	Non-market-based approaches
(Agenda sub-item 12(b))
		C.	New market-based mechanism
(Agenda sub-item 12(c))
			Proceedings
				59.	The SBSTA considered agenda sub-items 12(a–c) at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that its Chair would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting. At its 2nd meeting, as it was unable to reach agreement on this matter, the SBSTA agreed to consider these agenda sub-items at SBSTA 44 in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
	XIII.	Reports on other activities
(Agenda item 13)
		A.	Annual report on the technical review of information reported under the Convention related to biennial reports and national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 13(a))
			Proceedings
				60.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.5.
		B.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 13(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				61.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.9. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Riitta Pipatti (Finland) and Mr. Washington Zhakata (Zimbabwe). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				62.	The SBSTA took note of the annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.9.
				63.	The SBSTA concluded its consideration of the technical reviews in 2016 of GHG inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention and recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
		C.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 13(c))
			1.	Proceedings
				64.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.10/Rev.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Pipatti and Mr. Zhakata. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				65.	The SBSTA took note of the annual report on the technical review of GHG inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol, contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.10/Rev.1.
				66.	The SBSTA concluded its consideration of the technical review in 2016 of GHG inventories and initial reports for the second commitment period from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention that are also Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and recommended a draft decision on this matter, as contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.30/Add.1, for consideration and adoption at CMP 11.
		D.	Report on the implementation of domestic action by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol, based on the information reported in their national communications 
(Agenda sub-item 13(d))
			Proceedings
				67.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting. It took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.4.
		XIV.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 14)
			Proceedings
				68.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. No matters were raised under this item.
		XV.	Closure of and report on the session 
(Agenda item 15)
			1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
				69.	At the 2nd meeting of the SBSTA, a representative of the secretariat provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during the session in accordance with the provisions of rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
				70.	The secretariat informed Parties that some activities resulting from the negotiations at the session call for further support by the secretariat and, therefore, require additional resources in 2016 over and above the core budget for 2016–2017 as follows:
					(a)	Under agenda item 4, “Report of the Adaptation Committee”, funding of EUR 1.95 million will be required in the biennium 2016–2017 to cover the cost of supporting the implementation of the workplan of the AC. For Parties’ information, these are the same funds as those required under SBI agenda item 8;
					(b)	Under agenda item 10(a), “Methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention”, the secretariat has been requested to revise the electronic reporting application for a common tabular format, to make specific improvements to the software for the biennial report data interface, and to explore ways of creating links to other reporting software and platforms in order to facilitate the importation and exportation of activity-level data. The estimated cost of these activities is EUR 140,000;
					(c)	Under agenda item 13(c), “Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I, as defined in Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol”, funding of EUR 325,000 will be required to cover the cost of specific activities requested to be undertaken by the secretariat.
				71.	All of these amounts are preliminary and are based on the information available at the time of publication of this report. Overall, additional funds amounting to EUR 2.42 million will need to be provided to cover these activities.
				72.	The secretariat also noted that some of the conclusions adopted by the SBSTA and decisions proposed by it and adopted at this session will have budgetary implications beyond 2017. The resources requirements for the biennium 2018–2019 will be reviewed in the context of established budgetary procedures.
			2.	Closure of and report on the session
				73.	At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session and to make it available to all Parties.
				74.	At the same meeting, closing statements were made by representatives of 10 Parties, including on behalf of the African Group, AOSIS, the G77 and China, the Environmental Integrity Group, the EU and its 28 member States, the LDCs and the Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by representatives of ENGOs, farmers NGOs and youth NGOs.
				75.	Before the Chair concluded her last session in that capacity, a representative of the Presidency of the COP commended her for her hard work and the excellent results she achieved in a very short time frame. The Chair thanked all Parties, facilitators and the SBSTA team for their support.
			
				
					
					
