|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBSTA/2014/5 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 4 February 2015  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its forty-first session,
held in Lima from 1 to 6 December 2014
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session 
		(Agenda item 1)		1	4
		II.	Organizational matters 
		(Agenda item 2)		2–8	4
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		2–5	4
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		6	6
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair		7–8	6
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change 
		(Agenda item 3)		9–20	7
		IV.	Report of the Adaptation Committee 
		(Agenda item 4)		21	9
		V.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology 
		Mechanism: joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the 
		Climate Technology Centre and Network 
		(Agenda item 5)		22	9
		VI.	Methodological guidance for activities relating to reducing emissions from 
		deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable 
		management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in 
		developing countries 
		(Agenda item 6)		23	10
		VII.	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with 
		Climate Change Impacts 
		(Agenda item 7)		24–25	10
		VIII.	Matters relating to science and research 
		(Agenda item 8)		26–55	10
		A.	Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 	26–32	10
			Paragraphs	Page
		B.	Research and systematic observation		33–42	11
		C.	The 2013–2015 review		43–55	13
		IX.	Impact of the implementation of response measures 
		(Agenda item 9)		56–62	15
		A.	Forum and work programme		56–60	15
		B.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol		61–62	15
		X.	Methodological issues under the Convention
		(Agenda item 10)		63–79	16
		A.	Work programme on the revision of the guidelines for the review of 
			biennial reports and national communications, including national 
			inventory reviews, for developed country Parties		63–74	16
		B.	Methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties 
			included in Annex I to the Convention		75	17
		C.	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of 
			greenhouse gases		76	18
		D.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport		77–79	18
		XI.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol 
		(Agenda item 11)		80–97	19
		A.	Implications of the implementation of decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 
			and 1/CMP.8 on the previous decisions on methodological issues related 
			to the Kyoto Protocol, including those relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 
			of the Kyoto Protocol		80–87	19
		B.	Clarification of the text in section G (Article 3, paragraph 7 ter) of the 
			Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in particular the information 
			to be used to determine the “average annual emissions for the first three 
			years of the preceding commitment period”		88–90	20
		C.	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, 
			of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development mechanism		91–96	20
		D.	Implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest in 
			exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development mechanism 
			project activities		97	21
		XII.	Market and non-market mechanisms under the Convention 
		(Agenda item 12)		98–100	21
		A.	Framework for various approaches		98	21
		B.	Non-market-based approaches		99	22
		C.	New market-based mechanism		100	22
		XIII.	Work programme on clarification of quantified economy-wide emission reduction 
		targets of developed country Parties 
		(Agenda item 13)		101–107	22
		XIV.	Reports on other activities 
		(Agenda item 14)		108–110	24
			Paragraphs	Page
		A.	Annual report on the technical review of information reported under the 
			Convention related to biennial reports and national communications by 
			Parties included in Annex I to the Convention 		108	24
		B.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories from 
			Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		109	24
		C.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and 
			other information reported by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention 
			that are also Parties to the Kyoto Protocol under Article 7, paragraph 1, 
			of the Kyoto Protocol		110	24
			XV.	Other matters 
		(Agenda item 15)		111	24
		XVI.	Closure of and report on the session 
		(Agenda item 16)		112–117	24
		
I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)
	1.	The forty-first session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held at the United Nations Climate Change Conference, Lima, Peru, from 1 to 6 December 2014. The Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Emmanuel Dumisani Dlamini (Swaziland), opened the session on Monday, 1 December, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Mr. Narcis Paulin Jeler (Romania) as Vice-Chair of the SBSTA and Ms. Jurga Rabazauskaite-Survile (Lithuania) as Rapporteur.
II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
	A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
		2.	At its 1st meeting, on 1 December, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBSTA/2014/3).
		3.	At the same meeting, the SBSTA adopted its agenda as follows:
			1.	Opening of the session.
			2.	Organizational matters:
				(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
				(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
				(c)	Election of officers other than the Chair.
			3.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change.
			4.	Report of the Adaptation Committee.
			5.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network.
			6.	Methodological guidance for activities relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries.
			7.	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts.
			8.	Matters relating to science and research:
				(a)	Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change;
				(b)	Research and systematic observation;
				(c)	The 2013–2015 review.
			9.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
				(a)	Forum and work programme;
				(b)	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol.
			10.	Methodological issues under the Convention:
				(a)	Work programme on the revision of the guidelines for the review of biennial reports and national communications, including national inventory reviews, for developed country Parties;
				(b)	Methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(c)	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases;
				(d)	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport.
			11.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol:
				(a)	Implications of the implementation of decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 and 1/CMP.8 on the previous decisions on methodological issues related to the Kyoto Protocol, including those relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol;
				(b)	Clarification of the text in section G (Article 3, paragraph 7 ter) of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in particular the information to be used to determine the “average annual emissions for the first three years of the preceding commitment period”;
				(c)	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development mechanism;
				(d)	Implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest in exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development mechanism project activities.
			12.	Market and non-market mechanisms under the Convention:
				(a)	Framework for various approaches;
				(b)	Non-market-based approaches;
				(c)	New market-based mechanism.
			13.	Work programme on clarification of quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets of developed country Parties.
			14.	Reports on other activities:
				(a)	Annual report on the technical review of information reported under the Convention related to biennial reports and national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(b)	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
				(c)	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention that are also Parties to the Kyoto Protocol under Article 7, paragraph 1, of the Kyoto Protocol.
			15.	Other matters.
			16.	Closure of and report on the session.
		4.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that statements would be made following the adoption of the agenda and the launch of work. All opening statements, including those that were not delivered in the plenary owing to time constraints, have been posted on the SBSTA web page and made available on the submission portal.
		5.	Also at the 1st meeting, statements were made by representatives of 12 Parties, including on behalf of the Group of 77 and China (G77 and China), the Umbrella Group, the Environmental Integrity Group (EIG), the European Union (EU) and its 28 member States, the African Group, the least developed countries (LDCs), the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean, the Coalition for Rainforest Nations, the Central American Integration System, the Like-minded Developing Countries and another group of Parties. Statements were also made by representatives of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) secretariat, Japan on behalf of the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS) and the Coordination Group for Meteorological Satellites (CGMS), the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO).
	B.	Organization of the work of the session 
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
		6.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, at which the Chair drew attention to the proposed programme of work, outlined in his information note. In line with previously adopted SBI conclusions on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices, the Chair informed the SBSTA that no meetings will be organized after 6 p.m. He also drew the attention of delegates to a cut-off deadline for concluding the work of all groups of noon on Friday, 5 December, which aimed to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to proceed on this basis.
	C.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
		Proceedings
			7.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, as well as at its 2nd meeting, held on 6 December. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled rule 27 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, whereby the SBSTA is expected to elect its Vice-Chair. At the same meeting, the SBSTA noted that the consultations on the nominations of the SBSTA Vice-Chair are being coordinated with the consultations being conducted on the nominations to all other bodies under the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol by Mr. Cheikh Ndiaye Sylla (Senegal), Vice-President of the Conference of the Parties (COP) and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP), under the authority of the President of the COP and the CMP.
			8.	At the 2nd meeting, the Chair informed Parties that nominations for the post of Vice-Chair had not been received. As an exception to rule 27, paragraph 6, of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the SBSTA invited the COP to elect the Vice-Chair of the SBSTA at the closing plenary of COP 20.
III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change
(Agenda item 3)
	1.	Proceedings
		9.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2014/4, FCCC/SBSTA/2014/INF.15 and FCCC/SBSTA/2014/MISC.8. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Juan Hoffmaister (Plurinational State of Bolivia) and Ms. Beth Lavender (Canada). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		10.	The SBSTA welcomed the following documents prepared for the session:
		(a)	The synthesis report on methods and tools for, and good practices and lessons learned relating to, adaptation planning processes addressing ecosystems, human settlements, water resources and health, and good practices and lessons learned related to processes and structures for linking national and local adaptation planning, based on submissions from Parties and submissions from partner organizations of the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change;
		(b)	The miscellaneous document on the submissions referred to in paragraph 10(a) above;
		(c)	The report on progress made in implementing activities under the Nairobi work programme.
		11.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the valuable information on a diverse range of adaptation practices shared by Parties and Nairobi work programme partner organizations in their submissions referred to in paragraph 10(a) and (b) above.
		12.	The SBSTA also noted with appreciation the ongoing efforts of the secretariat in engaging and collaborating with partner organizations, including regional centres and networks, in implementing activities under the Nairobi work programme.
		13.	The SBSTA further noted the valuable information exchange among Parties and partner organizations during the eighth Focal Point Forum organized in conjunction with the session, and encouraged the secretariat to continue to explore ways to further enhance the organization of the Focal Point Forum. It further noted the importance of scheduling the Forum in such a way as to maximize the participation of Parties and partner organizations alike.
		14.	The SBSTA discussed further issues for consideration under the Nairobi work programme and concluded not to include any additional issues at this session.
		15.	The SBSTA recognized the role of the Nairobi work programme in addressing knowledge needs arising from the implementation of the Cancun Adaptation Framework pursuant to decision 17/CP.19.
		16.	The SBSTA concluded that the following activities should be undertaken by the secretariat, building on related previous work and in line with the scope of the Nairobi work programme, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA and in collaboration with relevant Nairobi work programme partner organizations, in response to the recommendations of the Adaptation Committee:
		(a)	Support the expert meeting of the Adaptation Committee on promoting livelihoods and economic diversification to build resilience in the context of planning, prioritizing and implementing adaptation actions during the third quarter of 2015, building on the relevant work undertaken under the Nairobi work programme on this matter;
		(b)	Disseminate existing and future relevant knowledge products produced by the Adaptation Committee in order to inform adaptation planning and actions at all levels.
		17.	The SBSTA decided to consider and elaborate, at SBSTA 44 (May 2016), relevant activities under the Nairobi work programme that support the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans.
		18.	The SBSTA considered the recommendations of the Adaptation Committee in relation to the joint meeting on best practices and available tools for the use of indigenous and traditional knowledge and practices, best practices and needs of local and indigenous communities and the application of gender-sensitive approaches and tools for understanding and assessing impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, and concluded that the following activities would be undertaken by the secretariat under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, in collaboration with the Adaptation Committee and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group, and with contributions from relevant Nairobi work programme partner organizations:
		(a)	Make publicly available a compilation of good practices and tools and available data collection initiatives for the use of local, indigenous and traditional knowledge and practices for adaptation, for consideration at SBSTA 44, building on existing knowledge-sharing platforms, including the database on best practices and available tools for the use of indigenous and traditional knowledge and practices for adaptation;
		(b)	Engage relevant Nairobi Work Programme partner organizations, including regional centres and networks, in strengthening communities of practice and networks at different levels, as well as in sharing good practices and tools at key meetings and events, as appropriate;
		(c)	Consider, in relevant knowledge products under the Nairobi work programme, the importance of integrating gender-sensitive approaches and tools, and local, indigenous and traditional knowledge and practices into national adaptation plans, including by involving holders of local, indigenous and traditional knowledge, as appropriate.
		19.	The SBSTA welcomed the Adaptation Knowledge Initiative and its Andean subregional pilot, launched by UNEP as its action pledge under the Nairobi work programme, for prioritizing and catalysing responses to subregion- and theme-specific adaptation knowledge needs, and encouraged the replication of this initiative in other subregions, particularly in vulnerable developing countries such as the LDCs, small island developing States and in Africa.
		20.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 16 and 18 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
IV.	Report of the Adaptation Committee
(Agenda item 4)
	Proceedings
		21.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2014/2. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item together with SBI agenda item 8 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Makoto Kato (Japan) and Ms. Jimena Nieto (Colombia). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 20.
V.	Development and transfer of technologies and implementation of the Technology Mechanism: joint annual report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network
(Agenda item 5)
	Proceedings
		22.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2014/3. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item together with SBI agenda sub-item 12(a) in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize) and Ms. Elfriede More (Austria). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 20.
VI.	Methodological guidance for activities relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries
(Agenda item 6)
	Proceedings
		23.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2014/INF.13, FCCC/SBSTA/2014/MISC.6 and Add.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2014/MISC.7 and Add.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Robert Bamfo (Ghana) and Mr. Stephen Cornelius (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland). As the SBSTA was unable to reach agreement on this matter, it agreed at its 2nd meeting to consider this agenda item at SBSTA 42 (June 2015) in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
VII.	Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts
(Agenda item 7)
	1.	Proceedings
		24.	The SBSTA considered this agenda at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2014/4. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item together with SBI agenda item 10 in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Lavender and Mr. Alf Wills (South Africa). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		25.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to recommend that COP 20 continue consideration of this matter on the basis of the text contained in the annex to document FCCC/SB/2014/L.8.
VIII.	Matters relating to science and research
(Agenda item 8)
	A.	Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(Agenda sub-item 8(a))
		1.	Proceedings
			26.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations facilitated by the SBSTA Chair. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			27.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the presentations made by the IPCC on its Fifth Assessment Report (AR5), including those made at the SBSTA–IPCC special events on the contributions of Working Groups I, II and III to the AR5, and on the AR5 Synthesis Report, as well as at the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th meetings of the structured expert dialogue (SED) on the 2013–2015 review.
			28.	The SBSTA noted its conclusions adopted at SBSTA 39, 40 and 41 welcoming the contributions of Working Groups I, II and III to the AR5 and the AR5 Synthesis Report.
			29.	The SBSTA recognized that it is important that the AR5 continue to be considered in depth by Parties to the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol so that all relevant agenda items are informed by the findings of the AR5. In that context, the SBSTA requested that the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, be prepared to invite the IPCC, in response to any request made by Parties, to inform its consideration of relevant agenda items, in particular through focused briefings on relevant information from the AR5 and other IPCC reports.
			30.	The SBSTA noted that the AR5 identified some information gaps, including in developing countries, especially in Africa, and on emerging issues, such as the links between climate change and desertification.
			31.	The SBSTA invited the IPCC and relevant international and regional research organizations to inform Parties about efforts undertaken to address the information gaps identified in the AR5, including as referred to in paragraph 30 above, for example at the meeting of the research dialogue at SBSTA 42.
			32.	The SBSTA recommended a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 20 (for the text of the draft decision, see document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/L.27/Add.1).
	B.	Research and systematic observation
(Agenda sub-item 8(b))
		1.	Proceedings
			33.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Chris Moseki (South Africa) and Mr. Stefan Roesner (Germany). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			34.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the statements delivered by representatives of the WMO, the GCOS secretariat, and of Japan on behalf of the CEOS and the CGMS.
			35.	The SBSTA welcomed the Synthesis Report of the AR5 of the IPCC and noted the continued key importance of research and systematic observation to the work of the IPCC.
			36.	The SBSTA welcomed the report by the GCOS secretariat on its recent and planned activities, including on the outcomes and recommendations of the GCOS programme review by its sponsors, which confirmed the significance of the programme and that it should continue. The SBSTA noted that the GCOS workshop on observations for climate change mitigation contributed to a better understanding of the observational requirements for mitigation.
			37.	The SBSTA noted the progress made by GCOS towards the development of a status report that will be presented at SBSTA 43 (November–December 2015), and on the new implementation plan that will be presented at SBSTA 45 (November 2016).
			38.	The SBSTA recalled the conclusions from SBSTA 37 and encouraged Parties to actively engage in the review of the status report and to support the development of the new implementation plan, including on aspects related to ocean observation and acidification.
			39.	The SBSTA recalled the conclusions from SBSTA 39 and welcomed the plans of the GCOS secretariat to organize, in collaboration with the IPCC and the secretariat, a workshop to identify ways to enhance systematic observation and related capacity, especially in developing countries to support preparedness and adaptation in a changing climate proposed to be held in February 2015 in Bonn, Germany. It invited the GCOS secretariat to provide a report on the workshop by SBSTA 43.
			40.	The SBSTA expressed its appreciation to CEOS and CGMS for their updated report on the progress made by space agencies providing global observations in their coordinated response to relevant needs of the Convention. It noted the importance of continuing and sustaining satellite observations on a long-term basis and welcomed the efforts to develop an architecture for climate monitoring from space. It invited CEOS to report on progress at SBSTA 43, and at subsequent sessions, as appropriate.
			41.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the information provided by WMO on the developments regarding the implementation of the Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS) and the outcome of the second session of the Intergovernmental Board on Climate Services. The SBSTA noted that GFCS has moved into an implementation phase and encouraged Parties to make use of the opportunities that GFCS provides to help to address climate variability and change at the national level, including to enhance climate observations and monitoring, and to support the formulation and implementation of national adaptation planning processes, as appropriate. The SBSTA invited WMO to report, by SBSTA 43, on progress made on the implementation of GFCS.
			42.	The SBSTA recalled paragraphs 45 and 47 of the report on SBSTA 39 and reemphasized the importance of systematic observation for the UNFCCC process at large and the continued need to secure funding to meet the essential needs for national, regional and global climate observations under the Convention on a long-term basis.
	C.	The 2013–2015 review 
(Agenda sub-item 8(c))
		1.	Proceedings
			43.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SB/2014/1 and FCCC/SB/2014/INF.3. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item jointly with agenda item 15 of the SBI in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Leon Charles (Grenada) and Ms. Gertraude Wollansky (Austria). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			44.	The SBSTA and the SBI took note of the submissions from Parties of their views on additional inputs to the SED on how to conclude the 2013–2015 review and on the final reporting of the SBSTA and the SBI to COP 21 (November–December 2015), as well as of the summary report on the 3rd meeting of the SED, held from 6 to 8 June 2014 in Bonn.
			45.	The SBSTA and the SBI welcomed the Synthesis Report of the AR5 of the IPCC, and recognized the usefulness for the 2013–2015 review of the contributions of all IPCC working groups to the AR5.
			46.	The SBSTA and the SBI also welcomed the 1st meeting of the fourth session of the SED, held on 2 and 3 December 2014 in Lima, and looked forward to the resumed fourth session of the SED, which will take place on 8 and 9 February 2015 in Geneva, Switzerland. They further welcomed the progress made by the SED as reported by its co-facilitators to COP 20.
			47.	The SBSTA and the SBI noted with appreciation the contributions made by the representatives of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the IPCC, the International Energy Agency, UNEP, the World Bank and the World Health Organization at the 1st meeting of the fourth session of the SED. They also noted with appreciation the financial contributions provided by Belgium, Japan, Switzerland and the United Kingdom to the 2013–2015 review.
			48.	The SBSTA and the SBI:
				(a)	Took note of, and expressed their appreciation to the secretariat for, the document on national information available for consideration by the SED;
				(b)	Recalled the conclusions adopted at their fortieth sessions requesting the SED to consider the information sources identified in decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 161, in particular subparagraphs (b–d), at the resumed fourth session of the SED, noting decision 1/CP.18, paragraph 89, with a view to ensuring a balanced consideration of the information referenced in document FCCC/SB/2014/INF.3;
				(c)	Requested the co-facilitators of the SED to take into account the information contained in this document and the views of Parties referred to in paragraph 44 above and contained in submissions made under this agenda item when preparing for the resumed fourth session of the SED.
			49.	The SBSTA and the SBI recalled decision 1/CP.17, paragraph 6, and noted paragraph 79 of the report on SBSTA 40 reflecting the discussion on how the 2013–2015 review informs the broader UNFCCC process, including the work of its bodies.
			50.	The SBSTA and the SBI recalled the conclusions adopted at their fortieth sessions and noted the consultations between the co-facilitators of the SED and Parties at SBSTA 41 and SBI 41 on the resumed fourth session of the SED.
			51.	The SBSTA and the SBI looked forward to the summary report on the fourth session of the SED, to be made available no later than 20 March 2015.
			52.	The SBSTA and the SBI encouraged the organizations mentioned in paragraph 47 above, as well as other relevant organizations and agencies as referred to in decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 161, to support the future work of the SED, including through consideration of the issues that emerged at previous meetings of the SED, and noted that the resumed fourth session of the SED will be its final meeting.
			53.	In fulfilment of the mandate given in decision 1/CP.18, paragraph 86(b), the SBSTA and the SBI requested the co-facilitators of the SED to prepare, with the assistance of the secretariat, a final factual report that includes a compilation and a technical summary of the summary reports on the meetings of the SED and to make it available no later than 3 April 2015.
			54.	The SBSTA and the SBI invited Parties to submit to the secretariat, by 1 May 2015, taking into account the work of the SED and being mindful of decision 1/CP.18, paragraph 91, the following:
				(a)	Any other information or gaps in information relevant to the 2013–2015 review, in accordance with decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 161, decision 1/CP.18, paragraph 84, and paragraph 132 of the report on SBSTA 39;
				(b)	Their views on the adequacy of the long-term global goal in the light of the ultimate objective of the Convention and the overall progress made towards achieving the long-term global goal, including a consideration of the implementation of the commitments under the Convention.
			55.	SBSTA 42 and SBI 42 will consider the report referred to in paragraph 53 above and the submissions from Parties referred to in paragraph 54 above, with a view to informing the COP, which shall take appropriate action based on the 2013–2015 review, in accordance with previous relevant decisions.
IX.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
(Agenda item 9)
	A.	Forum and work programme 
(Agenda sub-item 9(a))
		1.	Proceedings
			56.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SB/2014/INF.4 and FCCC/TP/2014/12. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item jointly with agenda sub-item 14(a) of the SBI in a contact group co-chaired by the Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Dlamini, and the Chair of the SBI, Mr. Amena Yauvoli (Fiji). The SBSTA also agreed to consider this agenda sub-item at this session jointly with agenda sub-item 9(b).
			57.	At its 2nd meeting, the Chair thanked Mr. Eduardo Calvo Buendia (Peru) and Mr. Delano Verwey (Netherlands), who helped him and the SBI Chair to facilitate the informal consultations on this agenda sub-item. At the same meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			58.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the submissions made by Parties and relevant organizations on options to strengthen opportunities for cooperation and collaboration among Parties related to this joint agenda sub-item.
			59.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the technical paper, prepared by the secretariat, on areas of convergence related to areas of cooperation, as well as the synthesis paper, both based on the reports on the work of the forum, the submissions made by Parties and relevant organizations, presentations and statements made and the review of the work of the forum, without prejudice to the consideration by the COP referred to in paragraph 60 below.
			60.	The SBI and the SBSTA could not conclude their consideration of this item and agreed to recommend that COP 20 continue consideration of this matter, on the basis of the text contained in the annex to FCCC/SBSTA/2014/L.6/Rev.1.
	B.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol 
(Agenda sub-item 9(b))
		Proceedings
			61.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings.
			62.	At its 1st meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item jointly with agenda sub-item 9(a) of the SBSTA and agenda sub-item 14(a) of the SBI. At the same meeting, the SBSTA also agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would undertake consultations with interested Parties on how to take up this agenda sub-item at the next session. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to continue at SBSTA 42 consultations on how to take up this agenda sub-item.
X.	Methodological issues under the Convention 
(Agenda item 10)
	A.	Work programme on the revision of the guidelines for the review of biennial reports and national communications, including national inventory reviews, for developed country Parties
(Agenda sub-item 10(a))
		1.	Proceedings
			63.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2014/INF.14, FCCC/SBSTA/2014/INF.19, FCCC/SBSTA/2014.INF.21 and FCCC/SBSTA/2014.INF.22. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Samuel Adejuwon (Nigeria) and Ms. Riitta Pipatti (Finland). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			64.	The SBSTA continued its discussion on the revision of the guidelines for the review of biennial reports and national communications, including national inventory reviews, for developed country Parties under the work programme on the revision of the review guidelines agreed on at SBSTA 37 (hereinafter referred to as the work programme).
			65.	The SBSTA recalled decision 23/CP.19 and its annex containing the guidelines for the technical review of information reported under the Convention related to greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories, biennial reports and national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties), including a placeholder for the UNFCCC Guidelines for the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (hereinafter referred to as the UNFCCC Annex I inventory review guidelines).
			66.	In discussing the UNFCCC Annex I inventory review guidelines, the SBSTA considered the views submitted by Parties in response to its invitation, as well as the updated draft of these guidelines prepared by the secretariat incorporating the submission received in response to that invitation. It also considered the report on the technical workshop under the work programme, including the draft revised UNFCCC Annex I inventory review guidelines produced by participants in that workshop, which was held from 4 to 6 November 2014 in Bonn.
			67.	The SBSTA advanced its work on the UNFCCC Annex I inventory review guidelines under this agenda sub-item but was not able to conclude it. It agreed to forward to the COP the draft decision text contained in annex I to document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/L.28 for its consideration at COP 20.
			68.	The SBSTA took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/INF.12 on the training programme for review experts for the technical review of biennial reports and national communications of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention.
			69.	The SBSTA recognized the importance of implementing the training programme for review experts for the technical review of biennial reports and national communications of Annex I Parties. It requested the secretariat to make available the online training courses of the training programme for the review experts participating in reviews from 2015 onwards.
			70.	The SBSTA advanced its work on the training programme for review experts for the technical review of biennial reports and national communications of Annex I Parties but was not able to conclude it. It agreed to forward to the COP the draft decision text contained in annex II to document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/L.28 for its consideration at COP 20.
			71.	The SBSTA took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/INF.19 on the training programme for review experts for the technical review of GHG inventories of Annex I Parties.
			72.	The SBSTA recognized the importance of implementing the training programme for review experts for the technical review of GHG inventories of Annex I Parties and requested the secretariat to make available in 2015 the online training courses of the training programme for the review experts participating in reviews from 2015 onwards.
			73.	The SBSTA agreed to assess the results of the training programme at SBSTA 44 and to make recommendations to COP 22 (November 2016) on the further development and enhancement of the training programme for review experts for the technical review of GHG inventories of Annex I Parties.
			74.	The SBSTA advanced its work on the training programme for review experts for the technical review of GHG inventories of Annex I Parties but was not able to conclude it. It agreed to forward to the COP the draft decision text contained in annex III to document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/L.28 for its consideration at COP 20.
	B.	Methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 10(b))
		Proceedings
			75.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Roger Dungan (New Zealand) and Mr. Seyni Nafo (Mali). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA recommended a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 20.
	C.	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases 
(Agenda sub-item 10(c))
		Proceedings
			76.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations facilitated by Mr. Takeshi Enoki (Japan). As the SBSTA was unable to reach agreement on this matter, it agreed at its 2nd meeting to consider this agenda sub-item at SBSTA 42 in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
	D.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport
(Agenda sub-item 10(d))
		1.	Proceedings
			77.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/MISC.9. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair would consult with Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			78.	The SBSTA took note of the information received from and progress reported by the secretariats of the ICAO and the IMO on their ongoing work on addressing emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport, and noted the views expressed by Parties on this information.
			79.	The SBSTA invited the secretariats of ICAO and IMO to continue to report, at future sessions of the SBSTA, on relevant work on this issue.
XI.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol 
(Agenda item 11)
	A.	Implications of the implementation of decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 and 1/CMP.8 on the previous decisions on methodological issues related to the Kyoto Protocol, including those relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 11(a))
		1.	Proceedings
			80.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/TP/2014/6. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Anke Herold (Germany) and Mr. Maesela Kekana (South Africa). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			81.	At the request of the CMP, the SBSTA continued its work on assessing and addressing the implications of the implementation of decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 and 1/CMP.8, on the previous decisions on methodological issues related to the Kyoto Protocol, including those relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol.
			82.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to compile into a user-friendly document all reporting, review and accounting requirements relating to the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol as adopted by the CMP, in order to facilitate and ensure their implementation, and that this document be made available on the UNFCCC website by the end of May 2015.
			83.	The SBSTA agreed to consider, at its forty-second session, the accounting, reporting and review requirements for Annex I Parties without a quantified emission limitation and reduction commitment for the second commitment period, along with the updated training programme for members of expert review teams (ERTs) participating in annual reviews under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol.
			84.	The SBSTA took note that an Annex I Party that is a Party to the Kyoto Protocol with a commitment inscribed in the second column, but not in the third column, of the table contained in Annex B in the Doha Amendment may request the ERT to review, as part of the review by the ERT of that Party’s annual inventory for the first year of the second commitment period, information relating to that Party’s base year.
			85.	The SBSTA recommended that such a request should be carried out as part of the annual review for the first year of the second commitment period.
			86.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 82 above and requested that the actions called for in these conclusions be undertaken by the secretariat subject to the availability of financial resources.
			87.	The SBSTA advanced its work on the matters referred to in paragraph 81 above but was not able to conclude it. The SBSTA agreed to forward the draft decision texts, including their annexes, contained in the annex to document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/L.29 for further consideration at CMP 10.
	B.	Clarification of the text in section G (Article 3, paragraph 7 ter) of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in particular the information to be used to determine the “average annual emissions for the first three years of the preceding commitment period”
(Agenda sub-item 11(b))
		1.	Proceedings
			88.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Herold and Mr. Kekana. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			89.	In response to the request made by the CMP, the SBSTA continued its consideration of the issues related to the clarification of the text in section G (Article 3, paragraph 7 ter) of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in particular the information to be used to determine the “average annual emissions for the first three years of the preceding commitment period”.
			90.	The SBSTA agreed to recommend to the CMP that consideration of this matter continue at SBSTA 42, taking into account the elements for the text of a draft decision contained in the annex to document FCCC/2014/SBSTA/L.25.
	C.	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development mechanism
(Agenda sub-item 11(c))
		1.	Proceedings
			91.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Heikki Granholm (Finland) and Mr. Marcelo Rocha (Brazil). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			92.	The SBSTA continued its work under the work programmes referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraphs 6 and 7.
			93.	The SBSTA took note of the views submitted by Parties and admitted observer organizations in response to the invitation of SBSTA 39, as reiterated at SBSTA 40.
			94.	The SBSTA agreed to recommend a draft decision on matters relating to the work programme referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraph 6, for consideration and adoption at CMP 10 (for the text of the draft decision, see document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/L.24/Add.1).
			95.	The SBSTA agreed to continue, at SBSTA 44, its consideration of issues outlined in the work programme referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraph 7, with a view to recommending a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at CMP 12 (November 2016).
			96.	The SBSTA recalled the consideration of SBSTA 40 of the work programmes referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraphs 5 and 10, as reflected in the conclusions contained in the report on that session (FCCC/SBSTA/2014/2), paragraphs 154 and 155, and agreed to defer the continuation of the consideration of these work programmes until SBSTA 44, with a view to reporting on the outcomes to CMP 12.
	D.	Implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest in exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development mechanism project activities
(Agenda sub-item 11(d))
		Proceedings
			97.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/CRP.2. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations facilitated by Mr. Eduardo Sanhueza (Chile). As the SBSTA was unable to reach agreement on this matter, the SBSTA agreed at its 2nd meeting to consider this agenda sub-item at SBSTA 42 in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
XII.	Market and non-market mechanisms under the Convention 
(Agenda item 12)
	A.	Framework for various approaches 
(Agenda sub-item 12(a))
		Proceedings
			98.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/TP/2014/9. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Mandy Rambharos (South Africa) and Mr. Peer Stiansen (Norway). As the SBSTA was unable to reach agreement on this matter, the SBSTA agreed at its 2nd meeting to consider this agenda sub-item at SBSTA 42 in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
	B.	Non-market-based approaches 
(Agenda sub-item 12(b))
		Proceedings
			99.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/TP/2014/10. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Rambharos and Mr. Stiansen. As the SBSTA was unable to reach agreement on this matter, the SBSTA agreed at its 2nd meeting to consider this agenda sub-item at SBSTA 42 in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
	C.	New market-based mechanism
(Agenda sub-item 12(c))
		Proceedings
			100.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/TP/2014/11 and Corr.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Rambharos and Mr. Stiansen. As the SBSTA was unable to reach agreement on this matter, the SBSTA agreed at its 2nd meeting to consider this agenda sub-item at SBSTA 42 in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
XIII.	Work programme on clarification of quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets of developed country Parties 
(Agenda item 13)
	1.	Proceedings
		101.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2014/INF.16 and FCCC/TP/2014/8. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Cristina Carreiras (Portugal) and Mr. Brian Mantlana (South Africa). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
	2.	Conclusions
		102.	The SBSTA concluded the work programme on clarification of quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets of developed country Parties, established by decision 1/CP.18, paragraph 8 (hereinafter referred to as the work programme).
		103.	The SBSTA recognized the importance of shared information and transparency in the clarification of the quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets of developed country Parties for gaining a better understanding of the elements contained in decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 5. In that regard, the SBSTA noted that the activities undertaken under the work programme since SBSTA 38 have provided a platform for Parties to share information and have helped to improve the transparency of developed country Party targets. This includes the following shared information and activities:
		(a)	The submissions from Parties contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2013/MISC.3 and Add.1 and on the web page for the work programme;
		(b)	The in-session events on quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets of developed country Parties that were held in conjunction with SBSTA 38–40 and included technical briefings and expert discussions on:
			(i)	Measuring the progress towards the achievement of developed country Party targets;
			(ii)	Comparability of mitigation efforts and assumptions and conditions related to developed country Party targets;
			(iii)	The clarification of the role of land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) and the use of carbon credits from market-based mechanisms relating to targets of developed country Parties;
		(c)	The update of document FCCC/SB/2011/INF.1/Rev.1, as contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/INF.6, and the updates of document FCCC/TP/2012/5, as contained in documents FCCC/TP/2013/7 and FCCC/TP/2014/8, by the secretariat, reflecting Parties’ submissions and information exchanged during the in-session events.
		104.	With regard to the identification of common elements as referred to in decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 5, the SBSTA acknowledged that there is a limited number of approaches among developed country Parties for measuring the progress made towards the achievement of the targets. The SBSTA acknowledged the importance of convergence in the coverage of sectors and gases as well as in the use of global warming potential values among developed country Parties.
		105.	The SBSTA acknowledged that the additional information provided by developed country Parties, during the activities referred to in paragraph 103 above, regarding the clarification of their targets and associated assumptions and conditions related to the ambition of the pledges as outlined in decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 5, increased the transparency of the targets and helped to facilitate the consideration of the comparability of efforts among developed country Parties.
		106.	The SBSTA also acknowledged the discussions on the transparency of, and reporting on, the use of carbon credits from market-based mechanisms.
		107.	The SBSTA noted that there is more than one approach to account for the role of LULUCF in achieving developed country Party targets. Developed country Parties are mainly using two approaches: the activity-based approach and the land-based approach. Regarding the comparability of the efforts among developed country Parties, the SBSTA acknowledged that comprehensive, complete and consistent coverage of the reported information is more significant than the choice of approach.
XIV.	Reports on other activities
(Agenda item 14)
	A.	Annual report on the technical review of information reported under the Convention related to biennial reports and national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 14(a))
		Proceedings
			108.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/INF.20.
	B.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 14(b))
		Proceedings
			109.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/INF.17.
	C.	Annual report on the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories and other information reported by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention that are also Parties to the Kyoto Protocol under Article 7, paragraph 1, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 14(c))
		Proceedings
			110.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/INF.18.
XV.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 15)
	111.	No matters were raised under this item.
XVI.	Closure of and report on the session 
(Agenda item 16)
	1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
		112.	At the 2nd meeting, the secretariat provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during the session pursuant to decision 16/CP.9, paragraph 20, whereby the Executive Secretary is to provide an indication of the administrative and budgetary implications of decisions if these cannot be met from existing resources within the core budget.
		113.	The Deputy Executive Secretary informed Parties that some activities resulting from the negotiations at this session call for further support by the secretariat and, therefore, require additional resources in the coming year over and above the core budget for 2014–2015.
	2.	Closure of and report on the session
		114.	At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the draft report on SBSTA 41. At the same meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA authorized the Rapporteur to complete the report on the session, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair.
		115.	At the same meeting, closing statements were made by representatives of 12 Parties, including on behalf of the G77 and China, the EIG, the EU and its 28 member States, the Umbrella Group, the Alliance of Small Island States, the Central American Integration System, the Coalition for Rainforest Nations and the LDCs. Statements were also made by the co-facilitators of the SED and by representatives of environmental non-governmental organizations (NGOs), farmers NGOs, research and independent NGOs, women and gender NGOs, youth NGOs, and business and industry NGOs.
		116.	The Executive Secretary, on behalf of the secretariat, paid tribute to the SBSTA Chair for his contribution to the UNFCCC process in his two years on the Bureau and one year as SBSTA Chair. She commended him for his calm and strong leadership, his productive outcomes constructed by working efficiently behind the scenes to find common ground and to advance issues, and his good cooperation with the SBI Chair. She further underlined that he was instrumental in changing the working culture of the UNFCCC by successfully implementing related rules and procedures.
		117.	The Chair concluded his last session by thanking everybody for having supported him and expressed appreciation for his experiences within the SBSTA and the friends he was able to make among representatives of Parties and the secretariat. He highlighted that time management should be centred around respect for the process and each other and that, together with the secretariat, the SBSTA had demonstrated that the UNFCCC work culture can be changed.
	
