|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBSTA/2015/2 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 10 July 2015  Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its forty-second session,
held in Bonn from 1 to 11 June 2015
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session  
		(Agenda item 1)		1	4
		II.	Organizational matters 
		(Agenda item 2)		2–5	4
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		2–3	4
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		4	6
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair		5	6
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change 
		(Agenda item 3)		6–12	6
			IV.		Methodological guidance for activities relating to reducing emissions from 
		deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable 
		management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in 
		developing countries 
		(Agenda item 4)		13–23	7
		V.	Issues relating to agriculture 
		(Agenda item 5)		24–27	9
		VI.	Matters relating to science and review 
		(Agenda item 6)		28–38	9
		A.	Research and systematic observation		28–35	9
		B.	The 2013–2015 review		36–38	11
		VII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures 
		(Agenda item 7)		39–44	11
		A.	Forum and work programme		39–43	11
		B.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol		44	12
			Paragraphs	Page
		VIII.	Methodological issues under the Convention  
		(Agenda item 8)		45–58	12
		A.	Methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties 
			included in Annex I to the Convention		45–50	12
		B.	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence 
			of greenhouse gases		51–55	13
		C.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport		56–58	14
		IX.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol  
		(Agenda item 9)		59–79	14
		A.	Implications of the implementation of decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 
			and 1/CMP.8 on the previous decisions on methodological issues related 
			to the Kyoto Protocol, including those relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 
			of the Kyoto Protocol		59–67	14
			B.	Accounting, reporting and review requirements for Parties
			included in Annex I to the Convention without a quantified emission 
			limitation and reduction commitment for the second commitment period		68–71	16
		C.	Clarification of the text in section G (Article 3, paragraph 7 ter) 
			of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in particular the 
			information to be used to determine the “average annual emissions 
			for the first three years of the preceding commitment period"		72–74	16
		D.	Implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest 
			in exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development 
			mechanism project activities 		75–79	17
		X.	Market and non-market mechanisms under the Convention  
		(Agenda item 10)		80–82	17
		A.	Framework for various approaches		80	17
		B.	Non-market-based approaches		81	18
			C.	New market-based mechanism		82	18
		XI.	Scientific, technical and socioeconomic aspects of mitigation of climate change  
		(Agenda item 11)		83–85	18
		XII.	Cooperation with other international organizations 
		(Agenda item 12)		86–89	19
		XIII.	Other matters  
		(Agenda item 13)		90	19
		XIV.	Closure of and report on the session  
		(Agenda item 14)		91–94	19
		
			Addendum – FCCC/SBSTA/2015/2/Add.1
			
Draft decisions forwarded for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties
	
	Draft decision -/CP.21. Further guidance on ensuring transparency, consistency, comprehensiveness and effectiveness when informing on how all the safeguards referred to in decision 1/CP.16, appendix I, are being addressed and respected
	
	Draft decision -/CP.21. Alternative policy approaches, such as joint mitigation and adaptation approaches for the integral and sustainable management of forests
	
	Draft decision -/CP.21. Methodological issues related to non-carbon benefits resulting from the implementation of the activities referred to in decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 70
	
Addendum – FCCC/SBSTA/2015/2/Add.2
	
	Draft decision forwarded for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol
		
		Draft decision -/CMP.11. Training programme for members of expert review teams participating in annual reviews under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol
		
		I.	Opening of the session
			(Agenda item 1)
			1.	The forty-second session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held at the World Conference Center Bonn, in Bonn, Germany, from 1 to 11 June 2015. The Chair of the SBSTA, Ms. Lidia Wojtal (Poland), opened the session on Monday, 1 June, and welcomed all Parties and observers. She also welcomed Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize) as Vice-Chair of the SBSTA and Ms. Stasile Znutiene (Lithuania)  as Rapporteur.
		II.	Organizational matters
			(Agenda item 2)
			A.	Adoption of the agenda
				(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
				2.	At its 1st meeting, on 1 June, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/1). At the same meeting, the agenda was adopted as follows:
				1.	Opening of the session.
				2.	Organizational matters:
					(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
					(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
					(c)	Election of officers other than the Chair.
						3.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate 
		change.
							4.	Methodological guidance for activities relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries.
				5.	Issues relating to agriculture.
				6.	Matters relating to science and review:
					(a)	Research and systematic observation;
					(b)	The 2013–2015 review.
				7.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
					(a)	Forum and work programme;
					(b)	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol.
				8.	Methodological issues under the Convention:
					(a)	Methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties 		included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(b)	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of 		greenhouse gases;
					(c)	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime 		transport.
				9.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol:
					(a)	Implications of the implementation of decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 and 1/CMP.8 on the previous decisions on methodological issues related to the Kyoto Protocol, including those relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol;
					(b)	Accounting, reporting and review requirements for Parties included in 	Annex I to the Convention without a quantified emission limitation and reduction commitment for the second commitment period;
					(c)	Clarification of the text in section G (Article 3, paragraph 7 ter) of the 	Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in particular the information to be used to determine the “average annual emissions for the first three years of the preceding commitment period”;
					(d)	Implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest in exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development mechanism project activities.
				10.	Market and non-market mechanisms under the Convention:
					(a)	Framework for various approaches;
					(b)	Non-market-based approaches;
					(c)	New market-based mechanism.
						11.	Scientific, technical and socioeconomic aspects of mitigation of climate 		change.
				12.	Cooperation with other international organizations.
				13.	Other matters.
				14.	Closure of and report on the session.
				3.	At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that statements would be made following the adoption of the agenda and the launch of work. Statements were made by representatives of 15 Parties, including on behalf of the African Group, the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), the Coalition for Rainforest Nations, the Group of 77 and China (G77 and China), the Environmental Integrity Group (EIG), the European Union (EU) and its 28 member States, the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean, the least developed countries (LDCs), the Umbrella Group and another group of Parties. Statements were also made by representatives of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the International Maritime Organization (IMO), UN-Oceans and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), as well as by representatives of environmental non-governmental organizations (NGOs), indigenous peoples organizations and women and gender NGOs.
			B.	Organization of the work of the session
				(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
				4.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, at which the Chair drew attention to the proposed programme of work outlined in the Chair’s information note. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to implement the practices previously endorsed by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices.
			C.	Election of officers other than the Chair
				(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
				5.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting and at its 3rd meeting, on 11 June. At the 3rd meeting, the Chair informed Parties that no nominations had been received for the post of Rapporteur of the SBSTA. In accordance with rule 22 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the current Rapporteur will remain in office until her successor is elected at the next ordinary session.
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change
			(Agenda item 3)
			1.	Proceedings
				6.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.2. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would consult with Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 3rd meeting. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				7.	The SBSTA welcomed the report on progress made in implementing activities under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, prepared for the session.
				8.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the continuing contributions to the work of the Nairobi work programme of its partner organizations, of which there are now 304, representing a broad spectrum of expertise, knowledge and experience in adaptation.
				9.	The SBSTA also noted with appreciation the contributions from Parties and Nairobi work programme partner organizations to the development of case studies on good practices and lessons learned in relation to adaptation planning processes addressing the four issues of ecosystems, human settlements, water resources and health, and in relation to processes and structures for linking national and local adaptation planning. The case studies will be made available for consideration at SBSTA 43 (November–December 2015).,
				10.	The SBSTA recognized that strengthening collaboration and linkages between the Nairobi work programme, other relevant workstreams and constituted bodies under the Convention is important in ensuring that the provision of knowledge support under the Nairobi work programme contributes to enhanced adaptation actions.
				11.	The SBSTA looks forward to the information exchange among Parties and Nairobi work programme partner organizations that will take place during the ninth Nairobi work programme Focal Point Forum, to be organized in conjunction with SBSTA 43, and encouraged the secretariat to continue to explore ways to enhance the interactive nature of that exchange.
				12.	The SBSTA expressed its appreciation to the EU, Japan and Switzerland for providing financial support for the implementation of activities under the Nairobi work programme.
		IV.	Methodological guidance for activities relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries
			(Agenda item 4)
			1.	Proceedings
				13.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Robert Bamfo (Ghana) and Mr. Heikki Granholm (Finland). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				Safeguards
					14.	The SBSTA completed its consideration of the need for further guidance on ensuring transparency, consistency, comprehensiveness and effectiveness when informing on how all the safeguards referred to in decision 1/CP.16, appendix I, are being addressed and respected.
					15.	The SBSTA took note of the views submitted by developing country Parties, as invited at SBSTA 38, on experiences and lessons learned from their development of systems for providing information on how all the safeguards are being addressed and respected and the challenges they face in developing such systems.
					16.	The SBSTA also took note of the views submitted by Parties and admitted observer organizations, as requested at SBSTA 38, on the type of information from systems for providing information on how all of the safeguards are being addressed and respected that would be helpful and that may be provided by developing country Parties.
					17.	In its consideration of this matter, the SBSTA also recalled the outcomes of the expert meeting on guidance on systems for providing information on how safeguards for REDD-plus activities are addressed and respected.
					18.	The SBSTA welcomes the summaries of information being provided by developing country Parties on how all the safeguards are being addressed and respected throughout the implementation of the activities referred to in decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 70.
					19.	The SBSTA agreed to recommend a draft decision on further guidance on ensuring transparency, consistency, comprehensiveness and effectiveness when informing on how all the safeguards referred to in decision 1/CP.16, appendix I, are being addressed and respected, for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties (COP) at its twenty-first session (November–December 2015) (for the text of the draft decision, see document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/2/Add.1).
				Non-market-based approaches
					20.	The SBSTA completed its consideration of the development of methodological guidance on non-market-based approaches such as joint mitigation and adaptation approaches for the integral and sustainable management of forests. It took note of the report on the in-session expert meeting on methodological guidance for non-market-based approaches, which took place during SBSTA 40.
					21.	The SBSTA agreed to recommend a draft decision on alternative policy approaches, such as joint mitigation and adaptation approaches for the integral and sustainable management of forests, for consideration and adoption at COP 21 (for the text of the draft decision, see document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/2/Add.1).
				Non-carbon benefits
					22.	The SBSTA completed its consideration of methodological issues related to non-carbon benefits resulting from the implementation of the activities referred to in decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 70.
					23.	The SBSTA agreed to recommend a draft decision on methodological issues related to non-carbon benefits resulting from the implementation of the activities referred to in decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 70, for consideration and adoption at COP 21 (for the text of the draft decision, see document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/2/Add.1).
		V.	Issues relating to agriculture
			(Agenda item 5)
			1.	Proceedings
				24.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2015/MISC.1 and Add.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2015/MISC.2. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Emmanuel Dumisani Dlamini (Swaziland) and Mr. Peter Iversen (Denmark). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				25.	The SBSTA, recalling Article 9 of the Convention, on the basis of the objective, principles and provisions of the Convention, continued, in accordance with decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 75, its scientific and technical work on issues relating to agriculture in the areas of (a) development of early warning systems and contingency plans in relation to extreme weather events and its effects such as desertification, drought, floods, landslides, storm surge, soil erosion and saline water intrusion, and (b) assessment of risk and vulnerability of agricultural systems to different climate change scenarios at the regional, national and local levels, including but not limited to pests and diseases; and will continue its work referred to in document FCCC/SBSTA/2014/2, paragraphs 87–89.
				26.	The SBSTA took note of the views submitted by Parties and admitted observer organizations in response to the invitation made at SBSTA 40.
				27.	The SBSTA acknowledged with appreciation the rich exchange of views by Parties during the two in-session workshops held at this session, and agreed to consider the reports on those workshops at SBSTA 43.
		VI.	Matters relating to science and review
			(Agenda item 6)
			A.	Research and systematic observation
				(Agenda sub-item 6(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					28.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Chris Moseki (South Africa) and Ms. Christiane Textor (Germany). It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.1. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					29.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the statements delivered by the representatives of the IPCC, WMO and UN-Oceans. It noted the importance of the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) for the UNFCCC process and welcomed the outreach efforts made by the IPCC to disseminate its findings.
					30.	The SBSTA took note of the information submitted by Parties and by the regional and international research programmes and organizations active in climate change research (hereinafter referred to as the research programmes and organizations) for the seventh meeting of the research dialogue, held on 4 June 2015. The information note on that meeting prepared by the Chair of the SBSTA was welcomed by Parties.
					31.	The SBSTA welcomed the research dialogue and expressed its appreciation to Parties for sharing information and for their views on: addressing data and information gaps; and lessons learned and good practices in relation to knowledge and research capacity-building, in particular in developing countries. The SBSTA also expressed its appreciation to the IPCC and to the research programmes and organizations for their contributions to the research dialogue.
					32.	The SBSTA thanked the secretariat for the summary report, requested at SBSTA 40, on the progress made in further enhancing the availability and visibility of scientific information relevant to the Convention on the UNFCCC website. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to continue its efforts to enhance the availability and visibility of such scientific information, including in order to disseminate the findings of the AR5, and to report on progress made at a future session of the SBSTA, as appropriate.
					33.	The SBSTA encouraged the scientific community to address information and research gaps identified during the research dialogue, including scenarios that limit warming in 2100 to below 1.5 °C relative to pre-industrial levels, and the range of impacts at the regional and local levels associated with these scenarios.
					34.	The SBSTA invited Parties to submit their views on possible topics for consideration at the research dialogue to be held at SBSTA 44 (May 2016) and beyond, taking into account the information note referred to in paragraph 30 above, via the submission portal by 9 March 2016.
					35.	The SBSTA also invited Parties to submit their views on themes for a possible research workshop to be held in conjunction with SBSTA 46 (May 2017) via the submission portal by 9 March 2016 for consideration at SBSTA 44.
					
					
					
			B.	The 2013–2015 review
				(Agenda sub-item 6(b))
				1.	Proceedings
					36.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2015/INF.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item jointly with SBI agenda item 12 in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Leon Charles (Grenada) and Ms. Gertraud Wollansky (Austria). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					37.	The SBSTA and the SBI, in accordance with decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 166, and in response to the mandate given at SBSTA 41 and SBI 41, began their consideration of the report of the structured expert dialogue (SED), referred to in SBSTA 41 and SBI 41 conclusions, which includes a compilation and a technical summary of the summary reports on the meetings of the SED and the submissions from Parties on the 2013–2015 review.
					38.	The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to continue their consideration of this matter at SBSTA 43 and SBI 43 (November–December 2015).
		VII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
			(Agenda item 7)
			A.	Forum and work programme
				(Agenda sub-item 7(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					39.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item jointly with SBI agenda sub-item 11(a) in a contact group co-chaired by the Chair of the SBSTA and the Chair of the SBI, Mr. Amena Yauvoli (Fiji). The SBSTA also agreed to consider this agenda sub-item at this session jointly with SBSTA agenda sub-item 7(b).
					40.	At the 3rd meeting, the Chair informed the SBSTA that Mr. Eduardo Calvo Buendia (Peru) and Mr. Delano Verwey (Netherlands) had helped her and the Chair of the SBI to facilitate the informal consultations on this agenda sub-item. At the same meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					41.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the draft decision text contained in the annex to decision 20/CP.20 on the forum and work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures, with a view to preparing a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
					42.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties to submit to the secretariat, by 21 September 2015, their views on the further elaboration of the work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures and the modalities for its implementation as detailed in the draft decision text contained in the annex to document FCCC/SB/2015/L.2.
					43.	The SBI and the SBSTA decided to consider the draft decision text referred to in paragraph 42 above at their forty-third sessions, with a view to recommending a draft decision on this matter for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
			B.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol
				(Agenda sub-item 7(b))
				Proceedings
					44.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item jointly with SBSTA agenda sub-item 7(a) and SBI agenda sub-item 11(a). At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed that its Chair would undertake consultations with interested Parties on how to take up this agenda sub-item at the next session. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to continue at SBSTA 43 consultations on how to take up this agenda sub-item.
		VIII.	Methodological issues under the Convention
			(Agenda item 8)
			A.	Methodologies for the reporting of financial information by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
				(Agenda sub-item 8(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					45.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2015/MISC.3 and Add.1 and FCCC/TP/2015/2. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that its Chair would consult with Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 3rd meeting. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					46.	The SBSTA welcomed the views submitted by Parties and observer organizations on methodologies for the reporting of financial information, and the technical paper summarizing existing international methodologies and drawing on relevant information contained in, inter alia, submissions from Parties and observer organizations.
					47.	The SBSTA also welcomed the joint in-session technical workshop on this matter held during this session under the auspices of the SBSTA, the SBI and the Standing Committee on Finance (SCF).
					48.	The SBSTA took note of the request made at COP 20 for the SCF to take into consideration the outcomes of the workshop referred to in paragraph 47 above, and looked forward to receiving an update on the work of the SCF on the measurement, reporting and verification of support beyond the biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows, in particular its recommendations on the methodologies for the reporting of financial information prepared for consideration at SBSTA 43 in accordance with decisions 6/CP.20 and 11/CP.20.
					49.	The SBSTA invited the SBI, within its mandate, to take note of the technical paper and the submissions from Parties and observer organizations referred to in paragraph 46 above and the outcomes of the workshop referred to in paragraph 47 above in its work related to the reporting of financial information by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties), as appropriate.
					50.	The SBSTA agreed to consider this matter at SBSTA 43 taking into account the recommendations of the SCF on this matter referred to in paragraph 48 above, which are to be included in the report of the SCF prepared for consideration at COP 21, the technical paper and the views submitted by Parties and observer organizations referred to in paragraph 46 above and the summary of the workshop referred to in paragraph 47 above, and to recommend a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 21.
			B.	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases
				(Agenda sub-item 8(b))
				1.	Proceedings
					51.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations, facilitated by Mr. Takeshi Enoki (Japan), addressing aspects of common metrics under both the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					52.	The SBSTA continued its consideration of the common metrics used to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by sources and removals by sinks (hereinafter referred to as common metrics).
					53.	The SBSTA welcomed the special event on common metrics, organized by the secretariat and held in Bonn on 7 June 2014, during which the IPCC presented its findings on common metrics from the AR5, following an invitation made at SBSTA 36.
					54.	The SBSTA expressed its appreciation to the IPCC and the representatives of its Working Groups I and III for providing information on their work and findings on common metrics in the context of the AR5, which included updated and relevant information on the scientific knowledge of common metrics.
					55.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of common metrics at SBSTA 44.
			C.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport
				(Agenda sub-item 8(c))
				1.	Proceedings
					56.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/MISC.4. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that its Chair would consult with Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 3rd meeting. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					57.	The SBSTA took note of the information received from and progress reported by the secretariats of ICAO and IMO on their ongoing work on addressing emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport, and noted the views expressed by Parties on this information.
					58.	The SBSTA invited the secretariats of ICAO and IMO to continue to report, at future sessions of the SBSTA, on relevant work on this issue.
		IX.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol
			(Agenda item 9)
			A.	Implications of the implementation of decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 and 1/CMP.8 on the previous decisions on methodological issues related to the Kyoto Protocol, including those relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol
				(Agenda sub-item 9(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					59.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Guilherme do Prado Lima (Brazil) and Ms. Anke Herold (Germany). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					60.	At the request of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP), the SBSTA continued its work on assessing and addressing the implications of the implementation of decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 and 1/CMP.8 on the previous decisions on methodological issues related to the Kyoto Protocol, including those relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol.
					61.	The SBSTA advanced, but was not able to conclude, its work on the matters referred to in paragraph 60 above. It agreed to continue its consideration of those matters at SBSTA 43 on the basis of the draft decision texts contained in annexes I and II to document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.13, with a view to forwarding those draft decisions for consideration and adoption at CMP 11 (November–December 2015).
					62.	The SBSTA, affirming the interlinkages between agenda sub-items 9(a) and (b), noted that requirements for Annex I Parties without a quantified emission limitation and reduction commitment for the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol would be included in a user-friendly document compiled by the secretariat, as agreed at SBSTA 41, after the conclusion of SBSTA agenda sub-item 9(b), in the appropriate sections addressing accounting, reporting, review and adjustments.
					63.	As also agreed at SBSTA 41, the SBSTA considered the updated training programme for members of expert review teams participating in annual reviews under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol.
					64.	The SBSTA agreed to forward a draft decision on the training programme for members of expert review teams participating in annual reviews under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol for consideration and adoption at CMP 11 (for the text of the draft decision, see document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/2/Add.2).
					65.	The SBSTA noted that the review of the report to facilitate the calculation of the assigned amount for the second commitment period and the review of the GHG inventory submissions under the Kyoto Protocol can start at the earliest in 2016.
					66.	The SBSTA also noted that conducting the review of the report to facilitate the calculation of the assigned amount for the second commitment period and the review of the 2015 GHG inventory submissions under the Kyoto Protocol in early 2016 may place an excessive burden on Parties, the secretariat and expert reviewers because of the simultaneous conduct of other review processes in 2016.
					67.	The SBSTA further noted that the review of the report to facilitate the calculation of the assigned amount and the review of the first GHG inventory submissions (2015 submissions) for the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol may be conducted in conjunction with the review of the 2016 GHG inventory submissions under the Kyoto Protocol.
					
					
			B.	Accounting, reporting and review requirements for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention without a quantified emission limitation and reduction commitment for the second commitment period
				(Agenda sub-item 9(b))
				1.	Proceedings
					68.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. do Prado Lima and Ms. Herold. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					69.	The SBSTA continued its consideration of the accounting, reporting and review requirements for Annex I Parties that are also Parties to the Kyoto Protocol without a quantified emission limitation and reduction commitment for the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol, as agreed at SBSTA 41.
					70.	The SBSTA initiated its consideration of the requirements for such Parties with respect to the issues identified in chapter V.G of document FCCC/TP/2014/6, in particular with regard to the issues addressed in the texts contained in the annex to document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.10.
					71.	The SBSTA advanced its work on the matters referred to in paragraph 70 above, but was not able to conclude it. It agreed to continue its consideration of these matters at SBSTA 43 taking into account the texts referred to in the same paragraph.
			C.	Clarification of the text in section G (Article 3, paragraph 7 ter) of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in particular the information to be used to determine the “average annual emissions for the first three years of the preceding commitment period”
				(Agenda sub-item 9(c))
				1.	Proceedings
					72.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. do Prado Lima and Ms. Herold. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					73.	In response to the request made at CMP 10, the SBSTA continued its consideration of the issues related to the clarification of the text in section G (Article 3, paragraph 7 ter) of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in particular the information to be used to determine the “average annual emissions for the first three years of the preceding commitment period”.
					74.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBSTA 43 taking into account the options for elements of the text of a draft decision contained in the annex to document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.11.
					
			D.	Implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest in exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development mechanism project activities
				(Agenda sub-item 9(d))
				1.	Proceedings
					75.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations facilitated by Mr. Eduardo Sanhueza (Chile). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					76.	The SBSTA continued its work on the implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest in exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development mechanism project activities.
					77.	The SBSTA noted the information collected through submissions from Parties in the course of the consideration of this agenda sub-item, contained in documents FCCC/SBSTA/2011/MISC.12, FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.15, FCCC/SBSTA/2012/MISC.10 and FCCC/SBSTA/2014/CRP.2.
					78.	The SBSTA invited Parties to submit their further views on this matter via the submission portal by 9 March 2016.
					79.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBSTA 44 with a view to reporting on the outcomes of that consideration at CMP 12 (November 2016).
		X.	Market and non-market mechanisms under the Convention
			(Agenda item 10)
			A.	Framework for various approaches 
(Agenda sub-item 10(a))
				Proceedings
					
						80.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Rocio García García-Naranjo (Peru) and Mr. Peer Stiansen (Norway). As it was unable to reach agreement on this matter, the SBSTA agreed at its 3rd meeting to consider this agenda sub-item at SBSTA 43 in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
			B.	Non-market-based approaches 
(Agenda sub-item 10(b))
				Proceedings
					
						81.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. García-Naranjo and Mr. Stiansen. As it was unable to reach agreement on this matter, the SBSTA agreed at its 3rd meeting to consider this agenda sub-item at SBSTA 43 in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
			C.	New market-based mechanism
(Agenda sub-item 10(c))
				Proceedings
					
						82.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. García-Naranjo and Mr. Stiansen (Norway). As it was unable to reach agreement on this matter, the SBSTA agreed at its 3rd meeting to consider this agenda sub-item at SBSTA 43 in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
		XI.	Scientific, technical and socioeconomic aspects of mitigation of climate change
			(Agenda item 11)
			1.	Proceedings
				83.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that its Chair would consult with Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 3rd meeting. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				84.	The SBSTA agreed that the work carried out so far under this agenda item has provided useful information on the scientific, technical and socioeconomic aspects of mitigation of climate change. The SBSTA noted that discussions on this matter and on the practical opportunities for implementation of mitigation actions are taking place under various bodies and processes under the Convention.
				85.	The SBSTA agreed to conclude its consideration of this matter.
				
				
				
		XII.	Cooperation with other international organizations
			(Agenda item 12)
			1.	Proceedings
				86.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 3rd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.3 and Corr.1. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that its Chair would consult with Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 3rd meeting. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				87.	The SBSTA welcomed document FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.3 and Corr.1, containing information on relevant cooperative activities between the secretariat and other intergovernmental organizations.
				88.	The SBSTA reaffirmed the importance of the secretariat engaging with other intergovernmental organizations as appropriate, in particular United Nations entities, with the aim of focusing on actions that support the effective implementation of the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol as well as of recent UNFCCC decisions.
				89.	The SBSTA recognized that the resources and expertise of other intergovernmental and international organizations are relevant to the UNFCCC process and encouraged the secretariat to work in partnership with them.
		XIII.	Other matters
			(Agenda item 13)
			90.	No matters were raised under this agenda item.
		XIV.	Closure of and report on the session
			(Agenda item 14)
			1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
				91.	At the 3rd meeting, the Chair informed the SBSTA of the advice received from the secretariat that the administrative and budgetary demands arising from the conclusions adopted during the session could be met from the existing resources within the core budget.
			2.	Closure of and report on the session
				92.	At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the draft report on SBSTA 42.At the same meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA authorized the Rapporteur to complete the report on the session, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair.
				93.	At the same meeting, closing statements were made by representatives of 12 Parties, including on behalf of the African Group, AOSIS, the Coalition for Rainforest Nations, EIG, the EU and its 28 member States, G77 and China, the LDCs and the Umbrella Group. Statements were also made by the co-facilitators of the SED and by representatives of environmental NGOs, farmers NGOs, indigenous peoples organizations, women and gender NGOs and youth NGOs.
				94.	In addition, at the same meeting, the Executive Secretary commended the SBSTA for having launched and concluded its work, under the guidance of its Chair, in an efficient and productive manner. The Chair closed the session by thanking all participants for their support, which had enabled the SBSTA to conclude its work in a successful and timely manner.
				
