|  | United Nations | FCCC/SBSTA/2017/4 |
|  |  | Distr.: General 30 June 2017   Original: English |

Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice
Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its forty-sixth session, held in Bonn 
from 8 to 18 May 2017
	Contents
		Paragraphs	Page
		I.	Opening of the session  
		(Agenda item 1)		1–2	4
		II.	Organizational matters 
		(Agenda item 2)		3–11	4
		A.	Adoption of the agenda		3–5	4
		B.	Organization of the work of the session		6–9	6
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair		10–11	6
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to 
		climate change 
		(Agenda item 3)		12–27	7
		IV.	Development and transfer of technologies: technology framework 
		under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement 
		(Agenda item 4)		28–36	9
		V.	Issues relating to agriculture 
		(Agenda item 5)		37–40	10
		VI.	Matters relating to science and review 
		(Agenda item 6)		41–56	11
		A.	Research and systematic observation		41–49	11
		B.	Scope of the next periodic review of the long-term goal under the 
				Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it		50–56	12
			VII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures
		(Agenda item 7)		57–70	13
		A.	Improved forum and work programme		57–62	13
			Paragraphs	Page
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris 
				Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of 
				response measures		63–69	14
		C.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol		70	15
		VIII.	Methodological issues under the Convention
		(Agenda item 8)		71–95	15
		A.	Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories 
`				for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention		71–75	15
		B.	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of 
				greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the 
				Convention		76–81	16
		C.	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of 
				biennial reports and national communications of Parties included in 
				Annex I to the Convention 		82–87	17
		D.	Greenhouse gas data interface		88–91	18
		E.	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of 
				greenhouse gases		92	18
		F.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime 
				transport		93–95	18
		IX.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol
		(Agenda item 9)		96–99	19
		A.	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, 
				paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean 
				development mechanism		96–97	19
		B.	Implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest in 
				exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development 
				mechanism project activities		98–99	20
		X.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement
		(Agenda item 10)		100–126	20
		A.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, 
				paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement		100–108	20
		B.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established 
				by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement		109–117	21
		C.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches 
				referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement		118–126	22
		XI.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and 
		mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, 
		paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement 
		(Agenda item 11)		127–131	23
		XII.	Cooperation with other international organizations  
		(Agenda item 12)		132–133	23
		
			Paragraphs	Page
		XIII.	Other matters  
		(Agenda item 13)		134	24
		XIV.	Closure of and report on the session  
		(Agenda item 14)		135–140	24
		
		
Addendum – FCCC/SBSTA/2017/4/Add.1
Draft decisions forwarded for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties
	
	Draft decision -/CP.23. Scope of the next periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it
	Draft decision -/CP.23. Training programme for review experts for the technical review of biennial reports and national communications of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
	
	
	I.	Opening of the session 
(Agenda item 1)
		1.	The forty-sixth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held at the World Conference Center Bonn, in Bonn, Germany, from 8 to 18 May 2017.
		2.	The Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize), opened the session on Monday, 8 May, and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Mr. Tibor Schaffhauser (Hungary) as Vice-Chair of the SBSTA and Mr. Aderito Manuel Fernandes Santana (Sao Tome and Principe) as Rapporteur.
	II.	Organizational matters
(Agenda item 2)
		A.	Adoption of the agenda
(Agenda sub-item 2(a))
			3.	At its 1st meeting, on 8 May, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBSTA/2017/1). A representative of one Party made a statement.
			4.	At the same meeting, the agenda was adopted as follows:
				1.	Opening of the session.
				2.	Organizational matters:
					(a)	Adoption of the agenda;
					(b)	Organization of the work of the session;
					(c)	Elections of officers other than the Chair.
				3.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change.
				4.	Development and transfer of technologies: technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
				5.	Issues relating to agriculture.
				6.	Matters relating to science and review:
					(a)	Research and systematic observation;
						(b)	Scope of the next periodic review of the long-term goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it.
				7.	Impact of the implementation of response measures:
					(a)	Improved forum and work programme;
					(b)	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures;
					(c)	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol.
				8.	Methodological issues under the Convention:
					(a)	Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(b)	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of greenhouse gas data inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(c)	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of biennial reports and national communications of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention;
					(d)	Greenhouse gas data interface;
					(e)	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases;
					(f)	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport.
				9.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol:
					(a)	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development mechanism;
					(b)	Implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest in exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development mechanism project activities.
				10.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement:
					(a)	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement;
					(b)	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement;
					(c)	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement.
					11.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement.
				12.	Cooperation with other international organizations.
				13.	Other matters.
				14.	Closure of and report on the session.
			5.	At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed that statements would be made following the adoption of the agenda and the launch of work. Statements were provided by representatives of 20 Parties, including on behalf of the Group of 77 and China (G77 and China), the Umbrella Group, the European Union (EU), the Environmental Integrity Group (EIG), the African Group, the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), the Arab Group, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples’ Trade Treaty (ALBA), the Coalition for Rainforest Nations, the Independent Association for Latin America and the Caribbean (AILAC), the least developed countries (LDCs) and the Like-minded Developing Countries. Statements were also made by representatives of women and gender non-governmental organizations (NGOs), youth NGOs and environmental NGOs.
		B.	Organization of the work of the session 
(Agenda sub-item 2(b))
			6.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st meeting, at which the Chair drew attention to the deadline for concluding the work of all groups by 1 p.m. on Wednesday, 17 May, to ensure the timely availability of draft conclusions for the closing plenary. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to proceed on this basis and in line with previously adopted conclusions of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) on the timely conclusion of negotiations and related working practices. A representative of one Party made a statement.
			7.	On 13 May, the SBSTA convened an informal plenary jointly with the SBI and the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Paris Agreement (APA) to consider linkages in the work of the subsidiary bodies on the implementation of the work programme under the Paris Agreement. At this meeting, the presiding officers of the subsidiary bodies made presentations on the Paris Agreement related items on the agendas of their respective bodies.
			8.	As requested by the Conference of the Parties (COP), at its twenty-second session, the Chair of the SBSTA convened an open multi-stakeholder dialogue on the operationalization of the local communities and indigenous peoples platform on 16 and 17 May 2017 and co-moderated it with Ms. Grace Balawag, a representative of indigenous peoples organizations. The dialogue included discussions among Parties, representatives of local communities and indigenous peoples organizations and other relevant organizations on the three proposed functions of the platform and possible ways and modalities of fulfilling these functions.
			9.	As requested at COP 21, technical expert meetings on mitigation and adaptation, which form the core of the technical examination processes, took place at this session.
		C.	Election of officers other than the Chair
(Agenda sub-item 2(c))
			10.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings, on 18 May. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled rule 27 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, whereby the SBSTA is expected to elect its Vice-Chair. At the same meeting, the SBSTA noted that the consultations on the nominations were ongoing.
			11.	At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA elected Ms. Annela Anger-Kraavi (Estonia) as Vice-Chair.
		III.	Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change
(Agenda item 3)
			1.	Proceedings
				12.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2017/2, FCCC/SBSTA/2017/3, FCCC/SBSTA/2017/INF.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2017/INF.3 and the submissions related to this agenda item. At its 1stmeeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Julio Cordano (Chile) and Ms. Beth Lavender (Canada). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				13.	The SBSTA welcomed the progress made in implementing activities under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change (NWP).
				14.	The SBSTA also welcomed the following documents prepared by the secretariat in collaboration with NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations, while noting that these collaborative activities have enhanced the role of the NWP as a knowledge hub that supports enhanced action on adaptation:
					(a)	A synthesis report on human health and adaptation with regard to understanding climate impacts on health and opportunities for action, prepared in consultation with participants of the 10th Focal Point Forum, in particular Parties, NWP partner organizations, including the World Health Organization, and other relevant expert organizations, and based on the information provided by Parties, NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations in their submissions;
					(b)	A synthesis report on adaptation planning, implementation and evaluation addressing ecosystems and areas such as water resources, prepared in collaboration with members of Friends of Ecosystem-based Adaptation, based on the information provided by Parties, NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations in their submissions;
					(c)	A summary report on initiatives in the area of human settlements and adaptation, prepared with inputs from the United Nations Human Settlements Programme, ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability and the Urban Climate Change Research Network;
					(d)	A report on the progress made in implementing activities under the NWP.
				15.	The SBSTA expressed its appreciation to Japan for providing financial support for the implementation of activities under the NWP.
				16.	The SBSTA also expressed its appreciation to Parties, NWP partner organizations and other expert organizations for their inputs and collaboration in the implementation of activities to inform adaptation planning and actions at the regional, national and subnational levels, particularly in relation to, inter alia, ecosystems, human settlements, water resources and health, as referred to in paragraph 14 above.
				17.	The SBSTA noted that these activities have helped strengthen partnerships with and among Parties through their national focal points, and also noted their potential contributions to the advancement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as set out in the documents listed in paragraph 14 above. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to continue exploring opportunities to develop linkages with the SDGs and encouraged the secretariat, in the context of its current mandates, to implement further outreach activities, with a view to understanding which of the activities undertaken and information produced under the NWP have proved most useful to those implementing adaptation activities, as well as how they have served in practice.
				18.	The SBSTA recognized that the documents referred to in paragraph 14 above could inform the work of Parties to address impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change.
				19.	The SBSTA invited NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations to implement relevant collaborative actions to address impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, taking into consideration, as appropriate, the documents referred to in paragraph 14 above. The SBSTA also invited NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations to review, update and renew their action pledges and to provide periodic updates of such action pledges, with a view to strengthening the role of the NWP as a knowledge hub that supports enhanced action on adaptation.
				20.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to continue to explore ways to further disseminate the outcomes of the activities undertaken under the NWP to facilitate the transfer of knowledge to constituted bodies, Parties and other relevant entities.
				21.	The SBSTA welcomed the constructive exchange of views among Parties and NWP partner organizations on ways to improve the effectiveness of the Focal Point Forum, and agreed that the Focal Point Forum should be improved with a view to:
					(a)	Enhancing the engagement of experts and expert organizations, including those from developing countries and those working on national adaptation plans;
					(b)	Providing an interactive space for information-sharing and the informal exchange of views among NWP partner organizations, Parties and other relevant organizations, bearing in mind that NWP partner organizations should be given sufficient opportunities to share their views during the Focal Point Forum;
					(c)	Facilitating collaboration and partnerships among NWP partner organizations, Parties and other relevant organizations, which could contribute to translating the key findings and gaps identified in the activities undertaken under the NWP into concrete adaptation actions;
					(d)	Informing future activities to be undertaken under the NWP, in a way that supports the potential role of the NWP in the implementation of the Paris Agreement, particularly on issues related to adaptation;
					(e)	Taking stock of the practical ways in which knowledge shared through the NWP has been used in the past and using this to set out ideas for future work.
				22.	The SBSTA noted that the future topics to be discussed at the Focal Point Forum could be selected on the basis of proposals made by Parties, NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations.
				23.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat, within the framework of its current mandates, to consider opportunities for engaging with Parties, NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations to co-organize events that would complement the Focal Point Forum and contribute effectively to the objectives referred to in paragraph 21 above. Such events could be held in conjunction with workshops or technical meetings organized in various regions, or take the form of side events at SBSTA sessions.
				24.	The SBSTA invited all Parties, NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations to provide support to enable the participation of relevant experts, including experts from developing countries, in the Focal Point Forum and other events under the NWP as referred to in paragraph 23 above.
				25.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to put emphasis on rural and coastal settlements, including remote settlements, during the 11th Focal Point Forum on human settlements and adaptation.
				26.	The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to share information in advance on the Focal Point Forum and on other events as referred to in paragraph 23 above so as to facilitate the involvement of experts.
				27.	The SBSTA invited Parties, NWP partner organizations and other relevant organizations to submit, by 12 January 2018, their views on further improving the relevance and effectiveness of the NWP in the light of the Paris Agreement for consideration at SBSTA 48 (April–May 2018). The SBSTA noted that those submissions will inform the review of the NWP at SBSTA 48.
	IV.	Development and transfer of technologies: technology framework under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 4)
		1.	Proceedings
			28.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to this agenda item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Elfriede More (Austria) and Mr. Washington Zhakata (Zimbabwe). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			29.	The SBSTA continued its deliberations on the elaboration of the technology framework established under Article 10, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
			30.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the views submitted by Parties, observers and other stakeholders on the principles and structure of the technology framework.
			31.	The SBSTA agreed that the principles of the technology framework, which are coherence, inclusiveness, result-oriented approach, transformational approach and transparency, should guide the Technology Mechanism in implementing the Paris Agreement.
			32.	The SBSTA welcomed the constructive discussions among Parties regarding the structure of the technology framework.
			33.	The SBSTA noted that the technology framework should strengthen the Technology Mechanism and the involvement of relevant stakeholders in accordance with their respective roles in achieving the transformative changes envisioned in the Paris Agreement, taking into account the initial key themes agreed at SBSTA 45 and the technology cycle.
			34.	The SBSTA also noted that the ongoing work of the Technology Executive Committee (TEC) and the Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN), including their work with relevant stakeholders, may be relevant for the elaboration of the technology framework and in facilitating enhanced actions on technology development and transfer. In this context, it invited the TEC and the CTCN to provide at SBSTA 47 (November 2017) information on the following:
				(a)	Activities that have been or are currently being undertaken, which are relevant for the implementation of the Paris Agreement, taking into account the key themes and their relation to the technology cycle;
				(b)	Additional activities that the TEC and the CTCN, subject to available resources, could undertake within their respective mandates and functions, individually or jointly, to implement the Paris Agreement.
				35.	The SBSTA agreed that the possible headings of the technology framework include, inter alia, purpose, principles and key themes.
				36.	The SBSTA also agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBSTA 47, taking into account progress made at SBSTA 45 and 46.
	V.	Issues relating to agriculture
(Agenda item 5)
		1.	Proceedings
			37.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Emmanuel Dlamini (Swaziland) and Mr. Heikki Granholm (Finland). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			38.	The SBSTA, in accordance with decision 2/CP.17, paragraph 75, continued its work on issues relating to agriculture.
			39.	The SBSTA welcomed the rich exchanges at its past five in-session workshops on issues relating to agriculture. It continued an exchange of views on issues relating to agriculture based on the outcomes of those workshops.
			40.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this agenda item at SBSTA 47, taking into account Parties’ deliberations and progress made at SBSTA 46.
		VI.	Matters relating to science and review
(Agenda item 6)
			A.	Research and systematic observation
(Agenda sub-item 6(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					41.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to this agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Ann Gordon (Belize) and Ms. Christiane Textor (Germany). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					42.	The SBSTA noted with appreciation the statements from the representatives of the Global Climate Observing System, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the World Climate Research Programme and the World Meteorological Organization for the opening meeting of the session.
					43.	The SBSTA welcomed the summary report on the eighth meeting of the research dialogue prepared by the SBSTA Chair.
					44.	The SBSTA noted the views submitted by Parties on possible topics for consideration at the ninth meeting of the research dialogue (RD9), held on 10 May 2017. It also noted the information note on RD9 prepared by the SBSTA Chair.
					45.	The SBSTA welcomed RD9 and its two themes: regional climate research data and information, and gaps; and scientific aspects relating to taking stock and assessing progress on mitigation. It expressed its appreciation to Parties and all participating research programmes and organizations and their representatives for their contributions. It noted the added value of the opportunity for discussion during the poster session and after the presentations.
					46.	The SBSTA also welcomed the work of the IPCC, including on the special reports on “Global Warming of 1.5 °C”, “Oceans and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate” and “Climate Change and Land”; and the “2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories”.
					47.	The SBSTA noted the importance of the work of the scientific community and the IPCC in support of strengthening the global response to climate change, including:
						(a)	Considering the human dimension, and indigenous peoples’ and traditional knowledge;
						(b)	Sustained funding for climate research and climate-relevant data, and advancing open access to climate-relevant public data, also noting the work of the Global Framework for Climate Services and other relevant organizations, particularly on capacity-building;
						(c)	Continued research on Earth system modelling in an effort to contribute to reducing projection uncertainty in support of the Paris Agreement;
						(d)	Communicating climate change science, which could be considered as a topic at the research dialogue;
						(e)	The outputs from downscaling techniques for global climate reanalysis and models, which could be considered as a topic at the research dialogue.
					48.	The SBSTA requested its Chair to produce, with the assistance of the secretariat, a summary report on RD9, to be made available prior to SBSTA 48.
					49.	The SBSTA invited Parties to submit via the submission portal, by 2 February 2018, their views on possible topics and considerations for the research dialogue to be held in conjunction with SBSTA 48 and beyond, taking into account the themes and presentations already addressed at previous research dialogue meetings and the themes suggested for future meetings, as well as the topics referred to in paragraph 47(d) and (e) above. It also invited Parties, in their submissions, to take into account the report back from the consultations of the Presidencies of COP 22 and 23 on the preparations of the 2018 facilitative dialogue, in particular any aspects relating to scientific information.
				B.	Scope of the next periodic review of the long-term goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it
(Agenda sub-item 6(b))
					1.	Proceedings
						50.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with SBI agenda item 14 in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Leon Charles (Grenada) and Mr. Frank McGovern (Ireland). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
					2.	Conclusions
						51.	The SBSTA and the SBI further considered the scope of the next periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it (hereinafter referred to as the next periodic review) in accordance with their mandate from COP 21.
						52.	The SBSTA and the SBI recalled that the COP decided that subsequent reviews should take place following the adoption of an assessment report of the IPCC or at least every seven years.
						53.	The SBSTA and the SBI also recalled that, at their forty-fourth sessions and in the context of the scope of the next periodic review, they noted the relevant work on the global stocktake under the APA, the facilitative dialogue, which will take place in 2018, and the technical examination processes. They further recalled the request by the COP to the SBSTA, the SBI, the APA and the constituted bodies under the Convention to accelerate their work on the work programme described in decision 1/CMA.1, paragraphs 5–7, and to forward the outcomes to COP 24 (December 2018) at the latest.
						54.	The SBSTA and the SBI recalled that the COP invited the IPCC to provide a special report in 2018 on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways.,
						55.	The SBSTA and the SBI noted that the 2013–2015 review, including its successes and shortcomings, can provide lessons for the next periodic review.
						56.	In order to ensure that the next periodic review is conducted in an effective and efficient manner, avoiding duplication of work and taking into account the results of relevant work conducted under the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol, the Paris Agreement and the subsidiary bodies, the SBSTA and the SBI agreed to recommend a draft decision for consideration and adoption at COP 23.
	VII.	Impact of the implementation of response measures 
(Agenda item 7)
		A.	Improved forum and work programme
(Agenda sub-item 7(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				57.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with SBI agenda sub-item 13(a) and to establish a contact group to convene the 3rd meeting of the improved forum, co-chaired by the Chair of the SBSTA and the Chair of the SBI, Mr. Tomasz Chruszczow (Poland), assisted by Ms. Nataliya Kushko (Ukraine) and Mr. Andrei Marcu (Panama). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				58.	The SBI and the SBSTA convened the 3rd meeting of the improved forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				59.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note with appreciation of the technical paper prepared by the secretariat on just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs.
				60.	The SBI and the SBSTA welcomed with appreciation the summary of the meeting of the ad hoc technical expert group (TEG) held in Bonn on 9 and 10 May 2017, presented by the co-chairs of the TEG, which provided further technical elaboration on the two areas of the work programme on the impact of the implementation of response measures in the context of sustainable development. The SBI and the SBSTA expressed their gratitude to the members of the TEG and the secretariat for the organization of the TEG meeting and their work and discussed the contribution of the TEG to the work of the improved forum.
				61.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the co-chairs of the TEG to prepare, with the support of the secretariat, and building on the summary of the TEG meeting referred to in paragraph 60 above, a detailed report on the discussion of the TEG at its meeting referred to in paragraph 60 above, for consideration at SBI 47 and SBSTA 47 (November 2017).
				62.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties and observers to submit, by 30 September 2017, their views on aspects related to economic diversification and transformation and just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs, in the context of sustainable development, with a view to informing the in-forum discussion on possible needs for modelling tools, including capacity-building opportunities, to take place at SBI 47 and SBSTA 47 and the in-forum training workshop on the use of economic modelling tools at SBI 48 and SBSTA 48 (April–May 2018).
		B.	Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures 
(Agenda sub-item 7(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				63.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and resumed 2nd meetings, on 18 May. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item together with SBI agenda sub-item 13(b) and to establish a contact group co-chaired by the Chairs of the SBSTA and the SBI, assisted by Ms. Kushko and Mr. Marcu. At its resumed 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below. At the same meeting, the SBSTA Chair informed Parties that he would request the co-facilitators of the informal consultations to assist him and the SBI Chair in updating the reflections note referred to in paragraph 64 below.
			2.	Conclusions
				64.	The SBI and the SBSTA considered the reflections note prepared by their Chairs, and took note of the discussion during these sessions on the modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures. The SBI and the SBSTA agreed that the recommendation being prepared under this agenda sub-item for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) at its first session will include language for the CMA to take the necessary procedural steps to enable the forum to serve the Paris Agreement as per decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 33 and 34.
				65.	The SBI and the SBSTA invited Parties and observers to submit, by 30 September 2017, their views, based on the discussion and the reflections note referred to in paragraph 64 above, on concrete elements of the modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				66.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize, under the guidance of the Chairs of the SBI and the SBSTA, a pre-sessional workshop before SBI 47 and SBSTA 47 that will focus on the elements of the modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures.
				67.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested their Chairs, with the support of the secretariat, to update the reflections note referred to in paragraph 64 above after the pre-sessional workshop referred to in paragraph 66 above.
				68.	The SBI and the SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat pursuant to the provisions contained in paragraph 66 above.
				69.	The SBI and the SBSTA requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		C.	Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol
(Agenda sub-item 7(c))
			Proceedings
				70.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and resumed 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to the Chair’s proposal that substantive discussions under this sub-item will be held in the response measures forum jointly with agenda sub-item 7(a). At the resumed 2nd meeting, the Chair informed the SBSTA that no specific conclusions had been reached on these matters. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at SBSTA 47.
		VIII.	Methodological issues under the Convention 
(Agenda item 8)
			A.	Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention 
(Agenda sub-item 8(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					71.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it submissions related to this agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting. At the 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					72.	The SBSTA welcomed the information submitted by Parties on their experience in the use of the IPCC 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands and noted that some Parties also chose to submit their views related to reporting on harvested wood products, specifically on the approaches set out in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. The SBSTA continued its discussions on these matters, as agreed at SBSTA 39.
					73.	The SBSTA welcomed the plans of the IPCC to produce the methodology report “2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories” by 2019, and noted that this work may inform the discussions under this agenda sub-item.
					74.	The SBSTA invited Parties to submit information on their experience in and their views on reporting on harvested wood products via the submission portal by 1 March 2018.
					75.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of these issues at SBSTA 48.
			B.	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 8(b))
				1.	Proceedings
					76.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting. At the 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					77.	The SBSTA continued its consideration of the results of the training programme for review experts for the technical review of greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties), as requested at SBSTA 44.
					78.	The SBSTA acknowledged the relevance of the training programme in contributing to the quality and consistency of the technical reviews of GHG inventories of Annex I Parties. It considered the experience gained since September 2015 in conducting technical reviews of GHG inventories of Annex I Parties using the “Guidelines for the technical review of information reported under the Convention related to greenhouse gas inventories, biennial reports and national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention” by experts who undertook the training programme. The SBSTA noted that the secretariat has received positive feedback from Parties and experts on the scope and focus of the courses of the training programme, including the final examinations, and agreed that there is no need to further develop and enhance the training materials at the present time.
					79.	The SBSTA agreed to assess the results of the training programme at SBSTA 50 (June 2019) with a view to making recommendations to COP 25 (November 2019) on the further development and enhancement of the training programme.
					80.	The SBSTA also agreed to extend the implementation of the ongoing training programme to 2020.
					81.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 80 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
			C.	Training programme for review experts for the technical review of biennial reports and national communications of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention
(Agenda sub-item 8(c))
				1.	Proceedings
					82.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Mr. Walter Oyhantcabal (Uruguay) and Mr. Harry Vreuls (Netherlands). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					83.	The SBSTA initiated its consideration of enhancing the courses of the training programme for review experts for the technical review of biennial reports (BRs) and national communications (NCs) of Annex I Parties.
					84.	The SBSTA acknowledged the relevance of the training programme in contributing to the quality and consistency of the technical reviews of BRs and NCs of Annex I Parties and noted that the period of implementation of the training programme ended in 2016.
					85.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat to enhance the materials of the training programme, on the basis of decisions 24/CP.19 and 9/CP.21 and taking into account the experience gained in conducting the technical reviews of BRs and NCs of Annex I Parties since 2014, before the start of the reviews of the seventh NCs and third BRs of Annex I Parties in 2018. The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to enhance the user interface of the training courses with a view to making them more user-friendly.
					86.	The SBSTA recommended a draft decision on the training programme and on its implementation in the period 2017–2020 for consideration and adoption at COP 23. It agreed to consider the need to further extend the training programme’s implementation at SBSTA 50.
					87.	The SBSTA requested that the actions of the secretariat referred to in paragraph 85 above be undertaken using existing financial resources.
				D.	Greenhouse gas data interface
(Agenda sub-item 8(d))
					1.	Proceedings
						88.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations facilitated by Mr. Takeshi Enoki (Japan). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
					2.	Conclusions
						89.	The SBSTA took note of the progress made by the secretariat in implementing the necessary technical changes to the GHG data interface following the adoption of the revised “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, part I: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual greenhouse gas inventories” as requested at SBSTA 38 and 39.
						90.	The SBSTA noted the need to continue to display the modules of the previous version of the GHG data interface, which have not yet been updated, pending the completion of the work referred to in paragraph 89 above. However, to avoid confusion, the SBSTA requested the secretariat to make the necessary arrangements to provide clarity in the previous version of the GHG data interface.
						91.	The SBSTA noted with concern the lack of financial resources to complete the activities referred to in paragraph 89 above. The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of matters relating to the GHG data interface at SBSTA 50 with a view to determining the next steps.
				E.	Common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of greenhouse gases
(Agenda sub-item 8(e))
					Proceedings
						92.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting. At the 2nd meeting, the Chair reported that Parties had not been able to agree on conclusions and that, in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, this sub-item will be included in the provisional agenda for the next session (SBSTA 47).
				F.	Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport
(Agenda sub-item 8(f))
					1.	Proceedings
						93.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it a submission related to this agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting. At the 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
					2.	Conclusions
						94.	The SBSTA took note of the information received from and results reported by the secretariat of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and noted the views thereon expressed by Parties under SBSTA 46 agenda item 8, “Methodological issues under the Convention”, sub-item (f), “Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport”. It also took note of the information received from the secretariat of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) about its plan to provide information on ongoing work at SBSTA 47.
						95.	The SBSTA invited the secretariats of ICAO and IMO to continue to report, at future sessions of the SBSTA, on their ongoing work on relevant issues.
		IX.	Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol 
(Agenda item 9)
			A.	Land use, land-use change and forestry under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol and under the clean development mechanism
(Agenda sub-item 9(a))
				1.	Proceedings
					96.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting. At the 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					97.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this agenda sub-item at SBSTA 48 with a view to recommending draft decisions on this matter in relation to the work programmes referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraphs 6, 7 and 10, for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) at its fourteenth session (December 2018), and to reporting to the CMP on the outcomes of the work programme referred to in decision 2/CMP.7, paragraph 5, at the same session.
			B.	Implications of the inclusion of reforestation of lands with forest in exhaustion as afforestation and reforestation clean development mechanism project activities
(Agenda sub-item 9(b))
				1.	Proceedings
					98.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting. At the 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
				2.	Conclusions
					99.	The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this agenda sub-item at SBSTA 50 with a view to recommending draft conclusions on this matter for consideration and adoption at CMP 15 (November 2019).
	X.	Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda item 10)
		A.	Guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 10(a))
			1.	Proceedings
				100.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and resumed 2nd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to this agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Kelley Kizzier (EU) and Mr. Hugh Sealy (Maldives). At its resumed 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				101.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 36, continued its work on the development of the guidance referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement.
				102.	The SBSTA took note of the round-table discussion among Parties held on 9 May 2017.
				103.	The SBSTA also took note of the submissions from Parties provided in response to the call for submissions set out in document FCCC/SBSTA/2016/4, paragraph 85.
				104.	The SBSTA further took note of the informal information note by the co-facilitators containing an informal list of elements raised by Parties that was prepared during SBSTA 46 and made available on the UNFCCC website.
				105.	The SBSTA invited Parties to submit, by 2 October 2017, their views, inter alia, on the content of the guidance, including the structure and areas, issues and elements to be addressed, including those raised by Parties at SBSTA 46.
				106.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat, under the guidance of the SBSTA Chair, to organize a round-table discussion among Parties based on the submissions in conjunction with SBSTA 47.
				107.	The SBSTA requested the SBSTA Chair to request that the relevant co-facilitators appointed by the SBSTA Chair prepare an informal document, having consulted with Parties during the round-table discussion referred to in paragraph 106 above, which factually reflects the views expressed by Parties during the round-table discussion.
				108.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 106 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		B.	Rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement 
(Agenda sub-item 10(b))
			1.	Proceedings
				109.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and resumed 2nd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to this agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Kizzier and Mr. Sealy. At its resumed 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				110.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 38, continued its work on the development of the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
					111.	The SBSTA took note of the round-table discussion among Parties held on 9 May 2017.
					112.	The SBSTA also took note of the submissions from Parties provided in response to the call for submissions set out in document FCCC/SBSTA/2016/4, paragraph 93.
					113.	The SBSTA further took note of the informal information note by the co-facilitators containing an informal list of elements raised by Parties that was prepared during SBSTA 46 and made available on the UNFCCC website.
					114.	The SBSTA invited Parties to submit, by 2 October 2017, their views, inter alia, on the content of the rules, modalities and procedures, including the structure and areas, issues and elements to be addressed, including those raised by Parties at SBSTA 46.
					115.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat, under the guidance of the SBSTA Chair, to organize a round-table discussion among Parties based on the submissions in conjunction with SBSTA 47.
					116.	The SBSTA requested the SBSTA Chair to request that the relevant co-facilitators appointed by the SBSTA Chair prepare an informal document, having consulted with Parties during the round-table discussion referred to in paragraph 115 above, which factually reflects the views expressed by Parties during the round-table discussion.
					117.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 115 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
		C.	Work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda sub-item 10(c))
			1.	Proceedings
				118.	The SBSTA considered this agenda sub-item at its 1st and resumed 2nd meetings. It had before it the submissions related to the agenda sub-item. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda sub-item in informal consultations co-facilitated by Ms. Kizzier and Mr. Sealy. At its resumed 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
			2.	Conclusions
				119.	The SBSTA, pursuant to decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 39 and 40, continued its work on the work programme under the framework for non-market approaches to sustainable development defined in Article 6, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement.
				120.	The SBSTA took note of the round-table discussion among Parties held on 8 May 2017.
				121.	The SBSTA also took note of the submissions from Parties provided in response to the call for submissions set out in document FCCC/SBSTA/2016/4, paragraph 101.
				122.	The SBSTA further took note of the informal information note by the co-facilitators containing an informal list of elements raised by Parties that was prepared during SBSTA 46 and made available on the UNFCCC website.
				123.	The SBSTA invited Parties to submit, by 2 October 2017, their views, inter alia, on the content of the draft decision, including the structure and areas, issues and elements to be addressed, including those raised by Parties at SBSTA 46.
				124.	The SBSTA requested the secretariat, under the guidance of the SBSTA Chair, to organize a round-table discussion among Parties based on the submissions in conjunction with SBSTA 47.
				125.	The SBSTA requested the SBSTA Chair to request that the relevant co-facilitators appointed by the SBSTA Chair prepare an informal document, having consulted with Parties during the round-table discussion referred to in paragraph 124 above, which factually reflects the views expressed by Parties during the round-table discussion.
				126.	The SBSTA took note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 124 above. It requested that the actions of the secretariat called for in these conclusions be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.
	XI.	Modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement
(Agenda item 11)
		1.	Proceedings
			127.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. It had before it document FCCC/TP/2017/1. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Rafael da Soler (Brazil) and Ms. Outi Honkatukia (Finland). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusions below.
		2.	Conclusions
			128.	The SBSTA welcomed the technical paper prepared by the secretariat on the modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement.
				129.	The SBSTA also welcomed the progress made in the work on the modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement as reflected in the informal note by the co-chairs of the contact group on this agenda item.
			130.	The SBSTA requested its Chair to continue consultations with the Co-Chairs of the APA, with a view to ensuring coherence and coordination and the timely incorporation of the modalities for the accounting of financial resources provided and mobilized through public interventions developed by the SBSTA into the modalities, procedures and guidelines for the transparency framework referred to in Article 13 of the Paris Agreement developed by the APA.
			131.	The SBSTA agreed to advance its work on this matter at SBSTA 47, taking into account the informal note by the co-chairs of the contact group on this agenda item as referred to in paragraph 129 above and building on the recommendations by the Standing Committee on Finance on the 2016 biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows.
	XII.	Cooperation with other international organizations 
(Agenda item 12)
		1.	Proceedings
			132.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st and 2nd meetings. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair of the SBSTA would consult with interested Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 2nd meeting. At the 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the conclusion below.
		2.	Conclusions
			133.	The SBSTA took note of document FCCC/SBSTA/2017/INF.2 containing the summary of the secretariat’s cooperative activities with other intergovernmental organizations.
		XIII.	Other matters 
(Agenda item 13)
			Proceedings
				134.	The SBSTA considered this agenda item at its 1st meeting. No matters were raised under this agenda item.
		XIV.	Closure of and report on the session 
(Agenda item 14)
			1.	Administrative and budgetary implications
				135.	At the resumed 2nd meeting, a representative of the secretariat provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of the conclusions adopted during the session in accordance with the provisions of rule 15 of the draft rules of procedure being applied.
				136.	The representative informed the SBSTA that there were a number of activities resulting from the negotiations at the session that call for support by the secretariat and require additional resources over and above the approved core budget for the biennium 2016–2017. These comprise:
					(a)	Under agenda sub-item 7(b), “Modalities, work programme and functions under the Paris Agreement of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures”, funding in the amount of EUR 35,000 will be required to organize a pre-sessional workshop before SBSTA 47 and SBI 47. The same costs have also been reported under SBI agenda sub-item 13(b);
					(b)	Under agenda item 10, “Matters relating to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement”, there is a financial implication of EUR 75,000 for the secretariat to organize a round-table discussion in conjunction with SBSTA 47, and to support the preparation of a factual reflection of the exchange.
					137.	He also stated that the amount of EUR 110,000 was preliminary and was based on the information available at that time. He expressed the hope that the secretariat could count on the continued generosity of Parties to provide additional funding in a timely and predictable manner. He further informed the SBSTA that some of the conclusions adopted at SBSTA 46 will have budgetary implications beyond 2017. The resource requirements for the biennium 2018–2019 will be reviewed in the context of established budgetary procedures.
					138.	The SBSTA Chair noted that without supplementary contributions, the secretariat will not be in a position to provide the requested support.
			2.	Closure of and report on the session
				139.	At its resumed 2nd meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the draft report on the session and authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair, to complete the report on the session. At the same meeting, closing statements were made by representatives of 18 Parties, including on behalf of the G77 and China, the Umbrella Group, the EU, the EIG, the African Group, AILAC, ALBA, AOSIS, the Arab Group, the Coalition for Rainforest Nations, the LDCs and a group of Parties. Statements were also made by representatives of indigenous peoples organizations, research and independent NGOs, women and gender NGOs, youth NGOs and environmental NGOs.,
				140.	The Chair thanked Parties, the facilitators and the secretariat for their support and closed the session.
				
				
					
				
